Unit 14 Tips for Creating and Giving Scientific Presentations

Introduction When we share our ideas with others, it's not just about what we
say but also about how we say it. Scientific presentations are a way of telling
the story of our research in a clear and engaging manner. A good presentation
helps the audience understand our work, even if they are not experts in our
field.

This chapter on Effective Scientific Presentations is based on a resource
prepared for the Graduate Physics Orientation Course “Physics 596” (2013) at the
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. It teaches us how to prepare and
deliver a talk step by step. It explains how to know our audience, organize our
slides, highlight only the most important points and present ideas with
confidence. It also gives practical tips-like using simple visuals, avoiding too
much text, and speaking clearly so that our message is understood and
remembered.

The chapter demonstrates that a scientific presentation is not just about data,
but about communication, clarity and connection with the audience.

Text Scan the QR code provided below for better understanding of the text with
sample slides:
https://courses.physics.illinois.edu/phys596/fa2013/Lectures/EffectiveScientificPresentations_FA13.pdf

How to get started? Step 1: Identify your audience: this will control the level
of your presentation and the amount of background material you need to orient
everyone in the audience. Step 2: Determine how much time you have for your
presentation: this will control how much time you have to talk about each part
of your outline. Step 3: Identify the main points you want to convey: you can
reasonably convey only 2-3 main points in a 20- or 30-minute talk. Step 4:
Create an outline of your talk: this will build in the logical organization of
your presentation and help you decide what figures and other supporting evidence
you need to make your points.

Organizing a 25-minute scientific talk Background and Introduction (~6 minutes)
=> 4-5 slides ~1 Title slide - Your names, date, citation to paper ~1 Outline
slide - Organization of talk ~1 Overview slide - Why is this research important?
~1-2 Background slides - Provides essential background for non-experts

Methods (~6 minutes) => 2-3 slides Theoretical/experimental methods used in
paper

Results (~9 minutes) => 4-5 slides ~ What did you (or the authors) find? Only
develop 1-2 key results

*Critique and Citation Summary (~3 minutes) => 2 slides 1 critique slide - What
was wrong with/good about the paper? 1 citation slide - What happened with the
result/field after the paper? *Journal club only

Summary (~1 minute) => 2 slides 1 Summary slide - Review the main points/
criticisms 1 Acknowledgement slide - Acknowledge sources of material, help
received, etc.

The title slide and outline prepares the audience to listen and shows
organization of talk

Title Slide Your names and affiliations Paper citation (for JC) Venue and date
Attention-getting graphic

Outline or overview of presentation Prepares the audience to listen Provides a
logical structure for your talk Provides motivation and context Summarizes key
points (limit to two or three for a 20- to 30-minute talk)

The “body” of your presentation is the intellectual content of your talk Problem
statement, motivation - ~1-2 slides Previous work - ~1-2 slides Methods - ~1-3
slides Key Results - ~5-6 slides

Provide a “summary” slide Recap key results and conclusions Reiterate main
critiques (for JC) This slide will probably stay on the screen during the
question period and will thus get the longest audience exposure - make it count!

TIPS FOR PREPARING YOUR TALK Have only 1 idea per slide Use the header to state
the main idea of the slide, and use the body of the slide to support that idea
Use well-labeled graphs and figures to illustrate your key points...this makes
the slide more real and interesting to the audience Avoid too much text or too
many distracting images

Use figures to illustrate your key points Figures: • enliven slides • promote
audience interest • provide supporting evidence for key points • help explain
complex ideas and relationships quickly • show how things work, etc

Label all elements in a figure • Point out important features • Label both axes
of graphs and show units • Provide a brief caption • Give credit to source

Presenting data is your most important and challenging task • Avoid copying a
graph from a formal article - they have a different style, e.g., labels are too
small • Use color and make lines thick, labels legible • Label axes and annotate
important points with arrows and add words • Use tables sparingly - if used
highlight important parts

Show the equipment IF it helps as part of your proof - but sparingly, not just
because you love it • Photographs give scale and reality - but add labels •
Schematics provide concept • Diagrams strip away unnecessary details • ALL OF
THESE can be useful in combination

Make sure you provide something to show scale, and include a short caption to
explain what the audience is looking at.

Use equations sparingly • Use equations only when necessary • If you use
equations: Slow down Talk through step by step Explain relevance Combine with a
picture that illustrates the physical principle involved

Remember, your goal is to convey your ideas, so avoid distracting text and
effects! • Don't overuse PowerPoint animations and sounds! • Make sure there is
good contrast between text and background • Use simple (or no) backgrounds on
slides • Eschew weird fonts • Use the same font throughout the talk • Don't use
calligraphy or serif fonts • Make all text at least 20 pt • Use San Serif fonts
• Use San Aarif font (e.g., Ariel) • Not Sarif font (e.g., Times New Roman)
Skinny parts disappear when projected

Use “normal” colors • DON'T use red/green or red/blue as contrasting colors •
Make sure colors look the way you expect using an LCD projector! • Avoid neon
colors and pastels • Don't use many random colors; people expect color to mean
something • Strive for easy reading

TIPS FOR GIVING A SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATION Pointers for giving the best possible
talk: • Maintain eye contact with audience - Don't stare at screen or monitor •
Do not read your talk! • Avoid nervous mannerisms - Pacing, bobbing, waving
arms, jingling coins • Use laser pointer or stick directed at screen Don't point
directly at overhead on projector Don't block the screen • Train yourself to
speak slowly and distinctly - practice! • Avoid “fillers”: “uh”, “like”, “um”,
“okay” • Be enthusiastic! If you don't act excited by your results, don't
expect the audience to be! • Don't show any material on slides (e.g., figures,
equations, text, etc.) you can't explain!! • Rehearse how you'll end your talk
Don't end with “Well, I guess that's it...” Don't just stop and let the
committee guess that you're done Thank the audience!

The best way to prepare for a talk is to Know Your Material • Practice,
practice, practice • Focus on communicating, not performing Humor is good, but
don't overdo it • Keep it simple • Prepare key phrases. It's okay to write out
material first Write the key point to make for each slide If the slide doesn't
have a point, eliminate it!!! • Stay on track Small (planned) digression is fine
if motivated, but get back on track (shows you are paying attention to audience)
• Bring a copy of your slides if giving a PowerPoint talk this will help you
practice you can distribute these to interested people • Make appropriate use of
the screen: don't underfill the screen, and don't put key information at the
edges of the screen.

Rehearse Your Talk! • A few days before: Practice in front of friends and check
timing Rehearse likely questions Solicit feedback about logic and clarity Revise
(shorten) • The night before: Go over one more time Put all materials in order
(number your slides!)

Check everything just before your talk • Check the projector Make sure you know
how to turn it on See that it is plugged in Check which way to position your
slides Adjust the focus • Check microphones, pointer, other tools • Arrange your
slides, notes, and other materials Be able to reach everything without moving Be
able to go through your slides without fumbling • Have a watch handy to check
the time

“Stage Fright”? Be Prepared! • Know your subject thoroughly Practice in a big
room in front of real people Have all your materials in order Arrive early
Familiarize yourself with the equipment • Ask a friend to sit in the middle of
the audience and speak primarily to him or her Tell him to look interested and
nod frequently Ask her to smile and nod encouragingly whenever she catches your
eye

For Talks To an Inexpert Audience: • Do not use slang or ‘laboratory’ terms •
Choose the simplest word • Don't use acronyms • Speak slowly and distinctly •
Present less information than in a talk to an “expert” audience, go into more
detail.

Handling questions is an essential part of giving a talk • As part of preparing
your talk, try to anticipate questions you might get In each slide, try to
identify what the weak points are, what questions you might ask, etc. • Be
prepared to repeat simple derivations of equations or estimates presented on
your slides • If you don't know the answer? Say “That's an excellent question.
I'm not sure; I'll have to look into it” or “Let's talk about it afterward”

Express your thanks • At the beginning of your talk Acknowledge colleagues and
collaborators who contributed to the work • At the end of the talk Thank your
committee for their attention

Glossary Methodology: The systematic process or set of methods used in
scientific research or presentations. Outline: The structured plan or roadmap of
your presentation. Journal Club: A scientific presentation gathering where
members present and discuss published research papers to learn, critique, and
stay updated in their field. Citation: A reference to a published work used to
support ideas, provide evidence, or acknowledge the source of information.
