Unit 2 The Man Who Knew Infinity Dir. Matthew Brown

Introduction

Srinivasa Ramanujan FRS (22 December 1887 - 26 April 1920) was a remarkable
Indian mathematician of the 20th century who revolutionized number theory,
infinite series, and mathematical analysis with his original work. Born in
Erode, Tamil Nadu, to a poor Brahmin family, this autodidact received sparse
formal education. At the age of 16, A Synopsis of Elementary Results in Pure and
Applied Mathematics (1886) by George Shoobridge Carr awakened the genius in him
leading to the formulation of original theorems. Although awarded a scholarship
to the University of Madras in 1903, he lost it due to his singular focus on
mathematics. For years he worked without steady income, eventually marrying
Janaki Ammal in 1909. His talent caught the attention of government official
Ramachandra Rao, who briefly supported him, and later the Madras Port Trust
employed him as a clerk.

Ramanujan started publishing in 1911, and the mathematicians were amazed by his
expertise in continued fractions and new contributions to partition functions.
In 1913, letters he wrote to British mathematician G.H. Hardy earned him a
scholarship from the University of Madras and a grant from Trinity College,
Cambridge. By the time he arrived in England on April 14, 1914, his English was
excellent. Along with Hardy, he made important contributions to the theory of
prime numbers and the theory of modular forms. Together, they also came up with
the renowned “Hardy-Ramanujan number” 1729—the lowest number which can be
written as the sum of two cubes in two different ways.

Ramanujan’s health deteriorated in England due to stress and scarcity of
vegetarian food during the First World War, and in 1917 he developed
tuberculosis. He returned to India in 1919 but kept on working until he died at
the age of 32. His final paper featured “mock modular forms,” the meaning of
which had confounded mathematicians for generations until verified in 2012, and
which has possible applications in contemporary physics. Spiritual in the
deepest sense, Ramanujan regarded mathematics as a language of the divine and
famously declared, “An equation for me has no meaning unless it expresses a
thought of God.”

In December 2011, the Government of India declared Ramanujan’s birthday as
National Mathematics Day, and also celebrated 2012 as the National Mathematical
Year. The life and work of the pioneering mathematician was subsequently
depicted in the 2015 biopic The Man Who Knew Infinity directed by Matthew Brown,
starring Dev Patel and Jeremy Irons as Ramanujan and Hardy respectively and is
based on the homonymous biography by Robert Kanigel, an American author.

In an article published in The New York Times on April 28, 2016, Director
Matthew Brown reveals his intention behind doing a film about mathematics:

“The math was always a subtext for me. It was always the background to a human
story. I was blown away by the story between these two people and what it means
for us to be open in society and for people to get past themselves to be able to
connect. Because I think that’s the only way that we are able to recognize
outliers and encourage talent.”

Matthew Brown, the director and screenplay writer, took extreme care to do
justice to the story line by presenting it in a realistic manner as a result of
which the film took 12 years to complete. The exterior scene shot on the actual
Trinity campus, where Hardy is seen carrying an umbrella on a sunny day and is
engaged in an argument with Ramanujan, was shot in rainy weather with only an
hour to shoot. The intensity of the scene that began with a conversation between
a believer and an atheist demanded technical experimentation to convey the
highpoint in the film as it ends with a surprise - Hardy displaying out of his
bag, the hardcopy of Ramanujan’s article that the former got published without
the latter’s knowledge. Here, the cinematic brilliance of the director is
displayed as the scene soon shifts to India where his wife is distributing
offerings to the invited guests at their house to celebrate his achievement
while his mother proudly announces the news of his article being published in
the London Mathematical Society. Two parts of the world acknowledge in
confluence, the moment when Hardy, the rocket, launches the satellite Ramanujan
into the orbit of science! The rest is history....

The assistance of Ken Ono, a mathematician, was also sought to ensure
authenticity in the portrayal of scenes and dialogue delivery. The story also
successfully conveys the protagonist’s connection to India and his family as he
desperately confesses to Hardy, “Don’t you know what I have given up to be
here.” The scenes depicting Ramanujan following his cultural beliefs in a
foreign land are presented in a neutral manner without any judgement or bias.
The moments when Ramanujan gets emotional are rendered so genuinely by the
director and the actor that they project the human side of a mathematician which
is often said to be “non-existent.”

YouTube Video

Outline of the Movie and Themes

The film begins with a quote by the British intellectual Bertrand Russell -
“Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth but supreme beauty.”

At the outset of the movie, as the cast and crew are mentioned, the scene opens
with Trinity College, Cambridge, England in 1920 as the setting. Hardy is
introduced in the scene as writing a letter wherein, he describes Ramanujan as
“the most romantic figure in the recent history of mathematics” and terms his
relationship with him as the “one romantic incident of my (Hardy’s) life.” Then,
the scene shifts to Madras, India, set in 1914. Ramanujan’s story unveils
through Hardy’s narration. Hardy says, “I did not invent him. Like other great
men, he invented himself.” Ramanujan is seen to be working out a mathematical
calculation on the bare ground of the temple premises of his family goddess
Namagiri of Namakkal.

Persistence and Individuality:

Ramanujan is denied employment in British occupied India citing his lack of
qualifications. Returning to Victoria Students’ Hostel where he stays with
Viswanatha Sastri whom he had tutored previously, he laments - “I’m doomed, like
Galileo. He died in poverty....” He treasures his notebooks filled with original
mathematical equations but they were ignored by the society that valued wealth
and academic degrees as foremost. When he approaches S. Narayana Iyer who was
the treasurer of the Indian Mathematical Society and chief accountant at the
Madras Port Trust office, he is appointed as a clerk there during the
period 1912-1914 upon a condition that Ramanujan will share his mathematical
knowledge with him every evening. Sir Francis Spring, the Chairman of the Trust,
initially doubted his capacity based on his looks and warns him, “Your accounts
had better be half as polished as your ego” in reply to Ramanujan’s
self-introduction that, “What you might see now is ordinary glass, but I promise
you will soon remain to see a diamond.” This interaction perfectly portrays
Ramanujan as a man of self-worth and points to the insignificance of money in
determining one’s dignity. Subsequently, he proves himself and wins the support
and admiration of these same people who ensure that he ends up in England along
with prominent mathematicians of the time.

Imagination and Humility:

Anna, as Ramanujan lovingly addresses Narayana Iyer, wants him to be recognised
on an international level. He states, “... British, even while they subjugate
us, must recognise that our brightest matches theirs.” He instigates Ramanujan
to “imagine”, to which he replies, “All I do is imagine.” Elsewhere, during his
first trip to England, sitting on a ship when a fellow traveller comments on the
distance and asks whether he can imagine that, Ramanujan humbly replies with a
self-satisfied smile, “I have known larger numbers.” These pithy statements sum
the work of his life and highlights the importance of being original in thoughts
in order to invent something new. His criticsisers like Spring later turn out to
be his ardent admirers. Hardy, initially, receives the letter containing
Ramanujan’s formulas with reservation regarding its authenticity. He suspects it
to have been written by his colleague, another great mathematician John Edensor
Littlewood. The first meeting between Littlewood and Ramanujan against the
backdrop of the University is particularly significant for many reasons. It
delineates the coloniser-colonised dichotomy as Ramanujan stares at the grand
building and Littlewood remarks sarcastically, “Yes. The intended effect. Don’t
be intimidated” and he is quick to add that “Great knowledge often comes from
the humblest of origins”, a pointer towards Ramanujan’s own status and also
proving Littlewood to be a true genius who is not overruled by ego. In fact, it
is Littlewood, an established mathematician, who initiates the conversation with
Ramanujan at first.

Racism:

The film also raises issues of racism at several levels. Hardy’s proposal to
offer a Fellowship to Ramanujan is outvoted at Trinity College. This was
foreseen by Littlewood, “I doubt a dark face will ever grace these walls, let
alone become a Fellow”, referring to the feeble chance of Ramanujan occupying a
place in the Royal Society amidst legends like Newton. Hardy’s reaction to this
is a deliberate silence as if time will prove everything. Surely enough, the
academia finally bestows the coveted Royal Society Fellowship (FRS) itself on
Ramanujan. Besides, when Ramanujan attends lectures in order to compensate for
his lack of degree, the harsh treatment of the professor is also exposed in a
matter-of-fact manner. Yet the fact that Trinity College permitted the scene to
be shot there, points towards readiness to change, a hope for humanity. The
director, in an interview in 2016, also notes the interesting fact that the
president of the Royal Society, then, was an Indian.

Relevance of the Title:

There are a few other intellectuals who, in their typical way, sneer at the
“uneducated Indian” and from that point the story centres around Hardy’s
attempts to reconcile them with Ramanujan and his own struggles with the latter
to convince him of the scientific method of research and publication that is
based on proofs rather than a “dance with numbers to infinity” as Hardy
describes Ramanujan’s way of arriving at formulas. Finally, when Hardy speaks
for Ramanujan’s cause to be granted an FRS, he reconsiders this statement he
made as he describes the purpose of mathematicians, “We are merely explorers of
infinity in the pursuit of absolute perfection. We do not invent these formulae,
they already exist and lie in wait for only the very brightest of minds, like
Ramanujan, ever to divine and prove. So, in the end, I have been forced to
consider, who are we to question Ramanujan, let alone God?”

Role of Janaki Ammal:

The film also presents the character of his wife, played by Devika Bhise, as a
strong woman who plays a significant role in his success. Despite the
restrictions imposed on her by the rigid social set up, she emerges as a woman
genuinely interested in his academic ventures and as a person with an outward
mindset. When he proposes to move to England, though she is reluctant in the
beginning for fear of social alienation, she agrees upon a condition that he
will take her too once situation permits. Despite severe accusations from her
mother-in-law, she supports him in achieving his goals. She continues to write
letters to him despite receiving no reply and her reaction, at the point when it
is revealed that her letters were hidden without posting by his mother, is
presented in a convincing manner. She openly expresses her feelings throughout
the story, a trait that required immense courage for a woman living in those
times.

Conclusion:

As the movie progresses, the effects of war and Ramanujan’s failing health are
entwined into the narrative that primarily focuses on his growing credibility
and persistent efforts to prove his findings. The worsening conditions of his
life due to lack of nutrition, emotional support and acceptance in the
scientific community coupled with the stress of work and war, lead to his
suicide attempt by jumping in front of a London train. The relationship between
Hardy and Ramanujan blossoms amidst these tragic circumstances, each
constructively influencing each other. At the end, he returns to India and the
one year he spent in his country before his untimely death is shown as snapshots
after the scene where Hardy delivers a heart-touching obituary.

Glossary Autodidact : self-taught Homonymous : having the same name/title Biopic
: a film that dramatizes the life of a real person (a portmanteau word in
English, that is a new word formed by blending the parts of the words
“biography” and “picture”)
