Unit 16 Team Presentations: Best Practices to Collaborate More Efficiently
Jordan Turner

Introduction This unit emphasizes the importance of collaboration in team
presentations. By dividing roles, coordinating effectively, and building on each
other’s strengths, teams can deliver more structured and engaging presentations.
Teamwork ensures clarity, balance, and smooth flow, helping audiences stay
attentive and involved.

In today’s fast-paced and technology-driven workplace, teams cannot afford to
let technical obstacles stand in the way of productivity. The right methods and
tools make it possible to overcome difficulties, helping teams stay on track and
deliver professional, impactful presentations. By understanding why
collaboration matters and by applying clear strategies, teams can work more
efficiently, share responsibilities effectively, and maintain consistency in
design and content.

This article discusses the importance of collaboration in presentation design
and provides best practices to ensure that teamwork remains smooth, organized,
and productive.

Text
https://www.beautiful.ai/blog/team-presentations-best-practices-to-reduce-collaboration-back-and-forth
January 27, 2022

Whether you’ve realized it or not, collaboration is a part of nearly every
team’s day-to-day workflow. From initial brainstorming to final approval on a
campaign, working in tandem with team members helps get things done faster, and
better.

Of course, collaboration can be counterproductive if you’re not doing it right.
When you work collaboratively with your team you open up a new set of obstacles
such as versioning issues, feedback chains, and cross-departmental blockers.
It’s important for executives and upper management to understand why
collaboration is crucial to their team’s success, and how to help facilitate it
for their company.

In this blog we talk about why collaboration matters and the best practices to
reduce back and forth snags for team presentations.

Why collaboration matters There’s a popular phrase that states, “If you want to
go fast, go alone; if you want to go far, go together.” Which translates to the
modern statement, “teamwork makes the dream work.” Whichever way you spin it,
it’s no secret that working together is more effective than working in a silo.
You’re simply able to cover more ground with more talent. Every colleague boasts
their own unique set of skills, ideas, and interests. Working together
collaboratively allows each team member to share their ideas, understand how
their peers think, and riff on new concepts together to achieve the best
possible outcome.

Collaboration encourages employees to bring their expertise to the table, in
turn teaching one another new things along the way. Not only does it open up
communication, and opportunities for teams to try new things, it also encourages
problem-solving to eliminate roadblocks. As a business is trying to scale,
collaboration is a key pillar in that growth.

Collaborating on team presentations Collaboration is not one-size-fits-all and
can look different for every team. Some teams may collaborate on campaign specs,
while others are working as a unit on a sales pitch presentation. Historically
speaking, working collaboratively on PowerPoint presentations created a lot of
bottlenecks for teams. Between going back and forth with version histories,
getting approvals, and waiting on in-house designers to finesse each deck; it
made the process painful and inefficient. In a 2021 survey, just under 20% of
people said that collaboration was their biggest challenge when creating a new
presentation. We’d be willing to bet that they weren’t using the right tools to
facilitate said collaboration in their workplace. Luckily with modern technology
and PowerPoint alternatives, collaboration has never been more seamless.

Increasing efficiency, decreasing the back and forth It may seem as hard as it
seems to create all the beautiful presentations your organization needs
remotely, securely, without putting other work on hold. To increase efficiency,
and reduce collaboration back and forth consider these six tips.

• Start with a Shared Library Nearly 50% of presenters said they pull design
inspiration from preexisting decks and can benefit from a Shared Library for
easy access to previous work. One of the greatest pain points of presentation
design is creating a deck from scratch with little-to-no design experience. Many
departments will rely on their marketing team to make final design tweaks after
their content has been added to each slide, but that creates a traffic jam in
the presentation process. Starting with a Shared Library — and pre-built
templates — gives team members a starting point to create something on-brand and
professional without being at the mercy of their art director’s time. You can
give your team access to their own deck designer by providing them with a
PowerPoint alternative tool to handle the heavy lifting of design, reducing the
need for creative and branding approval.

• Work in the cloud When you’re thinking about bottlenecks in your workflow,
what comes to mind? For most it’s probably the back and forth emails with
updated versions and approvals. Waiting for your data analyst to email you the
most recent metrics, or your boss to sign off on your work, can delay the design
process by hours or even days. Working in the cloud helps kill those
inefficiencies because everyone is always working in the most up to date version
of the presentation deck at all times. With softwares in the cloud you can
collaborate with anyone, at any time, without the need for tedious conversation
loops.

• Assign tasks to collaborators We’ve all had that person on our team that
claims they never got the message or the email got buried in their inbox. To
collaborate more seamlessly, effective communication is key. In Beautiful.ai
teams can assign tasks — or slides — to collaborators so there’s no confusion as
to who is responsible for what. By tagging your colleague on specific slides you
can easily delegate tasks so that you can work in tandem on the same project.
Each stakeholder can input the content exclusive to their department or role so
that you’re not going back and forth trying to track down the most relevant
information. Not only does this make things more time-efficient, but it improves
the accuracy of the deck.

• Unlock content management Collaboration is great, but when you have too many
cooks in the kitchen things can get messy (and nobody has time to redo a messy
deck). A key component to collaboration is content management so you can provide
design guardrails to teammates to ensure they stay visually consistent from
slide to slide. On average, teams find version control to be a fairly important
element in cross-departmental collaboration and presentation deck design to
maintain branding and content management. This eliminates the need to rely on
in-house designers to revise the deck once it’s complete.

• Provide feedback in real-time Managers and executives are constantly juggling
heaps of responsibilities, and it’s inevitable that things will get lost in the
shuffle. When a team finishes a presentation deck, they can be waiting for days
for feedback from upper management going back and forth on lengthy email chains
with suggestions and revision requests. Especially in a hybrid work environment
where teams are remote, being able to sync up and get sign off in real-time,
right from your browser, is a game changer. With Beautiful.ai Teams you can add
your feedback on the slide with a comment, and tag your team members, so your
feedback doesn’t fall between the cracks.

• Share seamlessly Lastly, stakeholders need to be able to share the
presentation with team members or external partners. When teams are working on
different versions of the deck, they’re constantly having to search their email
for the correct presentation file, make any necessary edits, and reupload the
file to send back to their collaborators. That act alone can add hours to the
presentation process. Instead, teams should share their decks out with a
shareable link so that team members can access the most current version with a
single click.

Glossary Collaboration: The act of working jointly with others to achieve a
shared objective. Cloud: A technology that stores and shares data over the
internet, allowing multiple users to access and edit files in real time.
Consensus: General agreement achieved through group discussion and alignment.
Coordination: Organizing people and tasks so that they function smoothly
together.
