Unit 3 "What's Expected of Us?" It's a tough choice... Ted Chiang

Introduction Ted Chiang (b.1967 as Chiang Feng-nan) is an American author of
speculative fiction. His parents were Chinese immigrants settled in America. He
graduated in Computer Science from Brown University. His debut story Tower of
Babylon (1990) won the Nebula Award. He is employed as a technical writer in
Microsoft and settled in Seattle. His collected works include Stories of Your
Life and Others (2002), Exhalation (2019). The short story “Story of Your Life”
was adapted into the film Arrival (2016). “It’s by Chiang in the style of an
op-ed published in The New York Times, about efforts to reduce inequality
through genetic enhancement. He also writes articles on topics related to AI.
The themes of his works centre mostly on concepts like time, space, free will,
technology, and human-machine interactions that combine scientific speculation
with philosophical depth. His accomplishments include PEN/Malamud Award, Hugo
Award, and Locus Award among others.

Chiang’s works encourage readers to think critically about technology, ethics,
and human agency in contemporary society. His stories are particularly valuable
for students navigating the challenges of an increasingly digital and
algorithm-driven world. His essay, “Why AI isn’t going to make art” published in
The New Yorker stirred a lot of interest among the public. His academic
expertise in the field in addition to creativity, authenticates his arguments
unlike other writers. He warns that in a world that idealises AI, the
repercussions of such an approach on society are to be thoroughly analysed. On
the one hand, it can prove to be time saving. Yet, the increasing dependence on
such tools and the tendency to consider the matter generated through a few
prompts to be original, demand urgent attention. Similarly, as companies utilise
these tools to save money, the pertinent question is whether quality is
compromised at some level and whether these are studied properly in terms of
future impact. As he states in an interview with Scott Detrow, he employs
science fiction as “a way to dramatize thought experiments” that are otherwise
difficult to comprehend.

“What’s Expected of Us?” (2005) is a story with deep philosophical implications
for humans who are fast transforming into machines in terms of behaviour. The
story, through employing science fiction elements, attempts to alert us to this
alarming transformation. It is structured like a warning from the future. A
communication technology appears to have been developed in the future to send
even lengthy messages to the past using a process called “negative delay” that
is accurate to mega second range. Hence, the message is presented as having been
received just over one year back in the past. The technology, in its infancy, is
already popular in the present in the form of a small device called Predictor.
Chiang emphasises the harmful impact of technological developments on the world
if not handled in a mindful manner. It is leading to a community without
freewill who are addicted to the make-belief world that it creates without even
realising that it is not real. The tragedy is that humanity has reached a point
where even if one realises the truth, there is nothing one can do to alter it.
Hence, the device is employed as a trope to denote the gradual loss of freewill.

The story, a speculative fiction, forces us to pause and think about our actions
before it is too late. On one level, the Predictor could resemble gadgets like
smart phones which are addictive in nature and on the other, it can be a symbol
that represents human beings themselves. It resembles a smiling human face
(green LED flash) which we find a lot around us and interests everyone but the
fact that it appears even before there is a need for it, is something to be
pondered on. If a smile is flashed (light blinks), one forms a bond (presses the
button) without questioning its credibility. The description of the device’s
“heart” as consisting of circuits points further towards the human-machine
resemblance. The story demands us to question whether what we term as choices
are actually imposed on us by the social constructs. The title of the story
aptly refers to this dilemma. It vividly portrays the different stages of a
relationship in human life- at first, one is so engrossed in what the relation
represents that one feels proud about it and displays it before others. By the
time the attraction fades and the reality sinks in, one is left to lead a
robotic existence. Thus, the self-deception that is gradually becoming a way of
life is projected as the ultimate threat to humans. This is one point where the
boundaries that separate the past from the present blur because humans have
always engaged in this process of acting, the only difference being in the fact
that earlier while we were unaware of what is fake, now we are both aware and
open to it.

Text This is a warning. Please read carefully.

By now you’ve probably seen a Predictor; millions of them have been sold by the
time you’re reading this. For those who haven’t seen one, it’s a small device,
like a remote for opening your car door. Its only features are a button and a
big green LED. The light flashes if you press the button. Specifically, the
light flashes one second before you press the button.

Most people say that when they first try it, it feels like they’re playing a
strange game, one where the goal is to press the button after seeing the flash,
and it’s easy to play. But when you try to break the rules, you find that you
can’t. If you try to press the button without having seen a flash, the flash
immediately appears, and no matter how fast you move, you never push the button
until a second has elapsed. If you wait for the flash, intending to keep from
pressing the button afterwards, the flash never appears. No matter what you do,
the light always precedes the button press. There’s no way to fool a Predictor.

The heart of each Predictor is a circuit with a negative time delay — it sends a
signal back in time. The full implications of the technology will become
apparent later, when negative delays of greater than a second are achieved, but
that’s not what this warning is about. The immediate problem is that Predictors
demonstrate that there’s no such thing as free will.

There have always been arguments showing that free will is an illusion, some
based on hard physics, others based on pure logic. Most people agree these
arguments are irrefutable, but no one ever really accepts the conclusion. The
experience of having free will is too powerful for an argument to overrule. What
it takes is a demonstration, and that’s what a Predictor provides.

Typically, a person plays with a Predictor compulsively for several days,
showing it to friends, trying various schemes to outwit the device. The person
may appear to lose interest in it, but no one can forget what it means — over
the following weeks, the implications of an immutable future sink in. Some
people, realizing that their choices don’t matter, refuse to make any choices at
all. Like a legion of Bartleby the Scriveners, they no longer engage in
spontaneous action. Eventually, a third of those who play with a Predictor must
be hospitalized because they won’t feed themselves. The end state is akinitic
mutism, a kind of waking coma. They’ll track motion with their eyes, and change
position occasionally, but nothing more. The ability to move remains, but the
motivation is gone.

Before people started playing with Predictors, akinitic mutism was very rare, a
result of damage to the anterior cingulate region of the brain. Now it spreads
like a cognitive plague. People used to speculate about a thought that destroys
the thinker, some unspeakable Lovecraftian horror, or a Gödel sentence that
crashes the human logical system. It turns out that the disabling thought is one
that we’ve all encountered: the idea that free will doesn’t exist. It just
wasn’t harmful until you believed it.

Doctors try arguing with the patients while they still respond to conversation.
We had all been living happy, active lives before, they reason, and we hadn’t
had free will then either. Why should anything change? “No action you took last
month was any more freely chosen than one you take today,” a doctor might say.
“You can still behave that way now.” The patients invariably respond, “But now
I know.” And some of them never say anything again.

Some will argue that the fact the Predictor causes this change in behaviour
means that we do have free will. An automaton cannot become discouraged, only a
free-thinking entity can. The fact that some individuals descend into akinitic
mutism whereas others do not just highlights the importance of making a choice.

Unfortunately, such reasoning is faulty: every form of behaviour is compatible
with determinism. One dynamic system might fall into a basin of attraction and
wind up at a fixed point, whereas another exhibits chaotic behaviour
indefinitely, but both are completely deterministic.

I’m transmitting this warning to you from just over a year in your future: it’s
the first lengthy message received when circuits with negative delays in the
megasecond range are used to build communication devices. Other messages will
follow, addressing other issues. My message to you is this: pretend that you
have free will. It’s essential that you behave as if your decisions matter, even
though you know that they don’t. The reality isn’t important: what’s important
is your belief, and believing the lie is the only way to avoid a waking coma.
Civilization now depends on self-deception. Perhaps it always has.

And yet I know that, because free will is an illusion, it’s all predetermined
who will descend into akinitic mutism and who won’t. There’s nothing anyone can
do about it — you can’t choose the effect the Predictor has on you. Some of you
will succumb and some of you won’t, and my sending this warning won’t alter
those proportions. So why did I do it?

Because I had no choice.

Glossary Immutable: unchangeable Legion: crowd Bartleby the Scriveners:
Reference to “Bartleby, The Scrivener: A Story of Wall-street”, written by
Herman Melville published in The Piazza Tales (1856). The character Bartleby in
the story is appointed as a scrivener (scribe) and performs his duties
exceptionally well in the beginning and after a point, he refuses with a stock
reply, “I would prefer not to” Lovecraftian horror: a sub-genre of horror
fiction that focuses on the fear of the unknown, especially involving cosmic
elements. Howard Philips Lovecraft (b.1890), was an American author and a
significant horror writer of the 20th C after whom the genre is named. His works
seem to align with the principles of Cosmicism/Cosmic Horror. He gained
popularity posthumously when his work The Call of Cthulhu gained attention and
the sub-genre Cthulhu Mythos developed from it. Gödel sentence: Kurt Friedrich
Gödel (1906 - 1978), Czechoslovakian mathematician and philosopher, proponent
of Incompleteness Theorem that studied the unprovability of certain equations
Automaton: a machine that operates on its own without the need for human
control, or a person who acts like a machine, without thinking or feeling
Determinism: the theory that everything that happens must happen as it does and
could not have happened any other way
