Unit 12 Galactic Portraits as Ekphrasis Sudeep Sen

Introduction Sudeep Sen is a noted contemporary poet, editor and translator
whose works have been widely acclaimed in India and abroad. His prize-winning
books include Postmarked India: New & Selected Poems (HarperCollins), Rain,
Aria, Fractals: New & Selected Poems Translations 1980–2015 (London Magazine
Editions), EroText (Vintage: Penguin Random House), Kaifi Azmi: Poems / Nazms
(Bloomsbury), and Anthropocene (Pippa Rann). He has also edited The
HarperCollins Book of English Poetry. Recognised for his contribution to
literature and culture, Sen was awarded the Senior Fellowship by the Government
of India. He is also the first Asian to be honoured with an invitation to speak
and read at the Nobel Laureate Festival.

Ekphrasis is a special way in which literature and art come together. It means
using words to describe or respond to a work of art so vividly that the artwork
comes alive in the reader’s imagination. In ancient Greece, poets often wrote
about paintings or sculptures in this way. An ekphrastic response is what
happens when a writer or poet creates such a description - it is their act of
responding to the artwork through language. Instead of just looking at the
image, they transform it into words, emotions, and ideas.

Text

I. Exposure Somewhere, something incredible is waiting to be known. – Carl Sagan

Beyond the spectral bandwidth of the rainbow, beyond ultraviolet and infrared
frequencies - the visual magic of the cosmos resides. Science is factual -
grounded and anchored in axioms. When one breaches the known boundaries, the
wonder and poetry begin to emerge.

I recall being taught the metaphysical poet John Donne’s iconic poem, The Sun
Rising, in my university undergraduate class: “Busy old fool, unruly sun, / Why
dost thou thus, / Through windows, and through curtains call on us? / Must to
thy motions lovers’ seasons run? / Saucy pedantic wretch, ...” The poem presents
an ironic twist, a recalibration of the old solar-system order: “Shine here to
us, and thou art everywhere; This bed thy centre is, these walls, thy sphere.”

During the teaching of this poem, all the literary tropes were discussed and
enunciated at great length, but one essential detail was missed out - the reason
Donne wrote the poem in the first place. He is said to have composed it after he
viewed the cosmos anew through the recently invented Galilean telescope, an
experience that changed his perspective of the skies forever.

Carl Sagan’s fascinating 1970s and ’80s grainy documentaries on space and the
human body first altered my own views of the outer and inner cosmoses. Much
later, at the Bangalore-based Teleradiology Centre’s laboratory, I had access to
spectacular X-ray digital plates on high-definition large monitors. Human
organs’ fractal structures and patterns appeared as stunning art - auricles,
ventricles, veins, arteries, aorta’s tree-like bonsai architecture and their
miniature magic. The beauty we see on the galactic scale is replicated at the
microscopic level, within the subatomic particles.

An extract from the poem Aorta Art, inspired by my visit: “Onion-pink aorta
transforms / crimson-red – tertiary twigs // split, as installation art revolves
/ on its axis. They pose as radiant organic sculptures, / . . . / . . . /
...Coral-shaped aortas rotate 360° / in perfect Brownian motion // / . . / / ...
illness radiating inner beauty – // hidden architecture, looped, / dancing in
secret helixes.”

II. Ekphrasis With technological advancements in each age, the views alter and
improve as does our experience – at the macro and micro level. In 1608 and 1609,
Hans Lipperhey and Thomas Harriot turned the first telescopes skyward. Months
later, Galileo Galilei began to use the telescope for work for which he would
come to be known as the “father of observational astronomy.” He had made
improvements to Lipperhey’s original version; the new device could enlarge
objects 20-times more. The most recent development has been the launch of the
James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) – the world’s largest and most powerful space
telescope. On July 12, 2022, the first set of photographs from this telescope
were shared with the world. I wonder, what elegant lyrics might the 16th century
‘Silver Poets’ – Wyatt, Howard, Raleigh and Sidney – have written, or Van Gogh
painted, in response to these spectacular new images.

When The Wire commissioned me to do a creative non-fiction/ poetic response to
the first of these never-before-seen high-definition photographic co..., I was
happy to take on the challenge as an extension of my long-standing interest in
science; especially light, fibre optics, fractals and photography. Here are my
responses to the first four telephotos — a combination of short creative
non-fiction & poetry:

SMACS 0723 (a galaxy cluster as it existed 4.6 billion years ago)

The drama of galactic portraiture – its telescopic image revealing a deep black
canvas speckled with gold, saffron, orange sprinkles. An impressionistic whir,
curving illumination, densities spilling, atoms splitting – tell-tale signatures
of exoplanets, seismic chemical refractions – a cosmic dance. Layered depths of
light, orbits’ elliptical arcs, meteor streaks in varying ribboned lengths –
swirls of turquoise, ochre, emerald, ruby, painting the sky – a foaming nebula
of dying stars fuelling, lighting up the future. [And the past]. At the flick of
a shutter, 4.6 billion years of stories tumble forth – the past is brought to
the present by a phalanx of hexagonal gold-mirror panels. We have travelled
backwards in time, despite being present in the present.

Southern Ring Nebula (an interstellar cloud – a shell of gas and dust expelled
into space by a dying star)

My consciousness has an alter-ego – a bipolar binary, a twin ring. Our organs
are mirrored, but we differ in subtle ways. Infrared vision reveals my blue core
– the obverse, my red. Shaped as an oyster shell, light emanates from the centre
to the periphery – in one, a single twinkle; the other, a couplet. Light then
dissipates into outer darkness – travelling over terrains of dust, gas, ridges,
canyons – millions of light-years passing swiftly in seeming slow-motion. A
bird’s eye view mimics an island rock – ocean waves lashing its parabolic
shores. Stars die too – in their “dying throes, [they] shake, pulsate, and at
the end, poof!” Births – equally dramatic, tectonic. I hear the heartbeat of
distant galaxies, feel their sonic rumble, imagine their palpability and
ginormous aggregation of materials – a magical orchestra, a nebula symphony.

Stephan’s Quintet (a constellation of five galaxies)

Five galaxies glow in a single frame – their spectacular amoeba-shapes, plasma
elongations – oblong, comma-tailed, yin-yan S-swish – embryonic mapping of
high-voltage energy. Central suns serving as oculi – a volute, an opening at the
apex of a dome. rem fluctuates, swimming in different wavelengths, in a constant
state of flux. Gravitational interaction – sweeping tails of gas, dust, stars,
pulled from several galaxies – smashing through the cluster of another, shock
waves, cosmic aftershocks. As colour temperatures, postures, positions vary –
the galactic dance temporarily freezes as still-images – grand ectopic
formations of violence and beauty.

Carina Nebula (a turbulent cloud of gas and dust)

What lies beyond these dramatic amber cosmic cliffs of Carina, birthplace and
graveyard for Milky Way’s largest stars – a nebula displaying a deep rumbling
space-show – colour, light, mythical/mystical shapes? DNA mappings more majestic
from afar, a spectrographic wonder. Utter magnificence, fluorescent – the
glowing black, blue, red, orange, yellow – a drunken swirl of psychedelia,
littered with the munificence of curving light – gases rising, towering like
infinite canyons, an illusion of solidity – birthing endless starbursts.

DAY BEFORE SUMMER SOLSTICE We are sealed in union today to celebrate tomorrow –
the earth's longest day.

We are mere stardust of an ancient supernova – one that gave us our metal,
blood, and breath.

Having had a glimpse of infinity, a brush with eternity, a vision of spectacular
beauty, an encounter with impermanence – a past coming alive 4.6 billion years
later, I stand starstruck, even emotional. And, to know that these Webb images
are only a beginning of a long road of epochal discoveries that will study every
phase of the 13.8 billion years of cosmic history, stirs anticipation. A true
marvel, an extraordinary time machine.

Glossary Ekphrasis : A literary description or commentary on a visual work of
art. Fractals : Complex geometric patterns that are self-similar at different
scales, often found in nature (like veins, snowflakes, or galaxies). Nebula : A
massive cloud of gas and dust in outer space, often the birthplace of stars.
Milky Way : The galaxy that contains our solar system, visible as a band of
light stretching across the night sky.
