“Singularity” (after Stephen Hawking) Marie Howe

Introduction

Marie Howe (b.1950), an American author, began her career as a journalist and
teacher before earning an MFA from Columbia University in 1983. Her poetry
collections include The Good Thief (1988), chosen by Margaret Atwood for
the 1987 National Poetry Series; What the Living Do (1998), a moving elegy for
her brother John; The Kingdom of Ordinary Time (2009); Magdalene (2017); and New
and Selected Poems (2024), which went on to win the 2025 Pulitzer Prize for
Poetry. In addition, she coedited the anthology In the Company of My Solitude:
American Writing from the AIDS Pandemic (1995). She was elected a Chancellor of
the Academy of American Poets and the poet-in-residence at The Cathedral Church
of St. John the Divine. She teaches at both New York University and Sarah
Lawrence College and resides in New York City.

“Singularity” is a poem that longingly looks back towards the origin of the
world when it was created to be habitable in the true sense. The title itself
signifies the feeling of oneness that existed between people in the past. The
poem opens with a rhetorical question which many would have pondered on at times
of hopelessness. It recalls the world where there was no poverty, diseases,
segregations and draw inspiration from Stephen Hawking’s theories on black holes
and the Big Bang. Through this scientific lens, Howe reflects on ideas of
interconnectedness, loss and the quest for belonging. The poem juxtaposes the
unity represented by the singularity with the fragmented, individualistic nature
of modern life, highlighting the emergence of a deep sense of separation in the
long run. By weaving in a line from Walt Whitman’s “Song of Myself”, Howe
suggests that we all originate from the same elements of the universe. The
humankind seems to be in a deep slumber from which the poet exhorts it to
“wake.” The elephant and coral reef are employed as symbols to highlight the
limitations of our current understanding of animal and natural world
experiences. It suggests a gap in our ability to measure or comprehend the
emotional or sensory experiences of entities beyond the human realm.

The strategic positioning of the word “nothing”, just before mentioning humans’
feeling of self-importance in the poem, conveys the essence of the poem.
Ultimately, “Singularity” becomes a profound meditation on the ties that bind
all existence, the mysteries of time and space and humanity’s yearning for
wholeness. The poem concludes with a resonant invocation – ending on the
timeless, powerful word, “home” – our planet, which encapsulates the journey
from nothing to everything. It is also an illustration of the interdisciplinary
meeting point where creativity blends with science, as the term “singularity”
connotes the same original state and concept of oneness in both the disciplines
of science and literature respectively.

Text

Do you sometimes want to wake up to the singularity we once were?

so compact nobody needed a bed, or food or money –

nobody hiding in the school bathroom or home alone

pulling open the drawer where the pills are kept.

For every atom belonging to me as good Belongs to you. Remember?

There was no Nature. No them. No tests

to determine if the elephant grieves her calf or if

the coral reef feels pain. Trashed oceans don’t speak English or Farsi or
French;

would that we could wake up to what we were – when we were ocean and before that

to when sky was earth, and animal was energy, and rock was liquid and stars were
space and space was not at all – nothing

before we came to believe humans were so important before this awful loneliness.

Can molecules recall it? what once was? before anything happened?

No I, no We, no one. No was No verb no noun only a tiny tiny dot brimming with

is is is is is

All everything home

Glossary Singularity: Reference to the scientific theory by Stephen Hawking
termed “singularity,” according to which our collective origins stem from a
single point in the universe, suggesting we all came from the same place
billions of years ago For every atom... to you.: A line from Walt Whitman’s poem
“Song of Myself” from the collection Leaves of Grass, suggesting we all come
from the same segment of the universe. As good: from the phrase “as good as”
meaning almost Trashed: destroyed Farsi: Persian language
