Unit 10 An Interview with Steven Shapin

Introduction

Steven Shapin is a leading American historian of science whose research focuses
on the social and cultural dimensions of scientific knowledge. He earned his PhD
in the history and sociology of science from the University of Pennsylvania and
has taught at institutions such as the University of Edinburgh and the
University of California, San Diego. Currently, he is the Franklin L. Ford
Research Professor of the History of Science at Harvard University.

Shapin’s influential works investigate how science is practiced, how it earns
trust, and how it is embedded in everyday life. His landmark book Leviathan and
the Air-Pump (1985) co-authored with Simon Schaffer, analyses the 17th-century
debate between Thomas Hobbes and Robert Boyle, revealing how scientific facts
are socially constructed. In The Scientific Life: A Moral History of a Late
Modern Vocation (2008), he examines the modern scientist’s role, motivations and
values, challenging stereotypes of scientists as purely objective figures.
Widely regarded as a major figure in the sociology and history of science,
Shapin has received numerous awards for his scholarship. His accessible writing
and thought-provoking arguments and modern vocation of science, even though
“nobility” is not a notion we’re comfortable with any longer and even though
modern scientists, of course, view themselves as labourers well worthy of their
hire.

Q: Today we bestow that sense of moral superiority not onto the individuals
practicing science as much as the institutions writ large where they work- be
they Cal Tech, MIT, or your own Harvard University. What inspired this shift in
our thinking?

Shapin: It’s true that a modern commonplace represents scientists as morally
much the same as anyone else. Indeed, parts of the book trace the
twentieth-century history of this commonplace- for it was not always so. And
insofar as we think this, the integrity of science must reside not in individual
but in institutional virtues. Either the scientific community has values which
it imposes on individual scientists or the institutions in which scientists work
are sites of virtue. The shift from regarding scientists as individually
virtuous to thinking of virtue as attached to institutions has many roots. I can
think of three, and each track back to changes occurring in the late nineteenth
and twentieth centuries. First, there is secularization: if Nature is no longer
God’s Book, then those who study it are no longer made virtuous through that
study. Second, there is the decline of the idea of Genius and the rise of the
idea of Method: the genius may be viewed as inspired, while Method may be seen
as mechanical, available to essentially anyone who masters and employs it.
Third, there is the rise of science as a remunerated job. So by the early
twentieth century, science appears as an extraordinarily authoritative form of
culture-but without that authority seeming to have any convincing foundations in
the capacities or virtues of individuals. At the same time, late nineteenth- and
early twentieth-century American universities were not the cogs-in-the-wheels of
State power and economic growth that they are now considered to be; professors
were not well paid; and it was plausible strongly to identify science with the
cloistered academic life- though, as I indicate, much, perhaps most, science was
done in industry from quite early in the twentieth century.

Q: If, as you say, the modern scientific life can be associated as much with
industry as with academia, what should we understand about the similarities and
differences between the two sorts of environment for doing science?

Shapin: As I indicated, there is a very pronounced tendency to identify science
with what’s done in academia- and especially in the great research universities.
But the facts suggest otherwise. At least from early in the twentieth century,
the majority of American scientists were employed not by institutions of higher
education but by industry and government. And that remains true today. Yet much
modern commentary, especially from academic social scientists, viewed industry
as a problematic environment for science. I’m not at all sure that’s right. If
we compare, so to speak, apples with apples, and look at the pure research done
in industry and that done in academia, many of the most popular contrasts
describe the situation rather poorly. If autonomy is the issue, many industrial
scientists from early in the twentieth century enjoyed as much of that as their
academic colleagues. And the same applies to notions of secrecy and openness. A
clear contrast of quality between university and industrial science similarly
seems not to hold, while a presumption that applied research and development
requires less brain-power than pure research is just dogmatic. But most of all,
I am impressed that both industrial and academic scientists seem to want
environments in which they can do interesting work and, perhaps, to enjoy a
degree of freedom in doing that work. An apparently banal idea, but one which is
very widely ignored.

Many other commentators have also rightly pointed out that academia and industry
have for some time been converging in their mores, structures, and conditions
for doing science. I agree with that, but I also suggest that there are ways in
which some sorts of modern industry can offer more propitious conditions for
scientific inquiry than some sorts of universities and colleges. There are
interesting implications here for the contemporary tendency to make universities
more “business-like”: we should have a better understanding of how industry now
seeks to manage and motivate creative people. If universities, indeed, now see
themselves as managing and motivating creative people, they might have much to
learn from high-tech and biotech businesses, and academics might then have
little to fear: What worries me is just that administrators’ ideas of what it is
to be “business-like” misrepresent pertinent business realities.

Q: How much of the success of industrialists working in the private sector comes
down to their thirst for profits instead of knowledge? It would seem like the
almighty dollar is what helps drive their industriousness and the high-tech
world in which we now live.

Shapin: Business is business, and scientists who work in the commercial sector
are expected to contribute to profits. Yet a strong contrast between the search
for profits and the search for knowledge doesn’t describe industrial science
very well in the early twentieth century and describes it less well today. For
one thing, the distinction between knowledge and commercial goods makes less
sense in the “knowledge economy” than it once may have done. We now understand
that both knowledge and durable goods may each have monetary value. For another,
to say that people working in industry are driven by money may miss as much as
it gets right. Scientists who want “interesting work” and good conditions for
doing it may find these in industry, while money may be as much a sign that
one’s work has succeeded as it is a motive for doing it. Nor should one
neglect aspects of altruism, even utopianism that one can readily find among
scientists and engineers working in industry, and, of course, expecting to be
rewarded: some pioneers of the internet thought they might make societies more
democratic and less authoritarian; many scientists working in biotech reckon
their labors might cure dreadful diseases. I should also add that academic
scientists who create commercializable intellectual property and who bring in
grants are increasingly the apples of university administrators’ eyes and that
scientific research with evident commercial potential is much encouraged by both
these administrators and by funding agencies. The problem with the attribution
of a “money motive” is not that it’s wrong- in industry or in academia- but that
it’s importantly incomplete.

Q: A provocative aspect of your book is its stress on the role of personal
virtue, even charismatic authority, in much late modern science and technology,
though a popular image of science represents it as a profoundly impersonal
practice. What do you mean by the claim that patterns of familiarity and
charisma persist?

Shapin: They don’t just persist; I argue that there are important areas of
contemporary science and technology in which the personal virtues and
charismatic authority are more important than they used to be. The key here is
the uncertainty attending much scientific inquiry, especially in high-tech and
biotech. If many aspects of the way we live are increasingly governed by rules
and routines, scientific inquiry is an inherently uncertain affair. If you knew
exactly what you were going to find out, you wouldn’t- properly speaking- be
doing research.

But in areas of entrepreneurial science, the uncertainties are even greater than
they are in much academic science. How will the science and technology develop?
Will there be a market for these things? Will competitors emerge? And,
importantly, how do you organize and motivate people in entrepreneurial
enterprises? Since none of the answers to such things can be looked up in a
manual, very often the solution comes embodied in the person who speaks for the
organization, whose vision it is, who articulates what is to be done, how, and
to what ends. We are now familiar with the attribution of charisma to such
entrepreneurs as Steve Jobs, Craig Venter, and many others. Recognizing someone
who possesses charismatic authority is not the same thing as saying that they’re
wonderful people, but one ought to take charismatic authority very seriously.

Entrepreneurs are often driven by vision and they embody that vision for those
who choose to join and follow them. I spend some time in my book observing
entrepreneurs “pitching” their companies to venture capitalists, and I note how
often venture capitalists view the personal characteristics of the entrepreneur
as about the most certain feature of an investable project. Technologies may
change; markets may change; but the energies, vision, and commitment of the
entrepreneur can be as durable, and as pertinent, as anything else in the scene.
As venture capitalists often say, they “bet on the jockey, not on the horse”- on
people more than on technology. And they’re being quite hard-headed as and when
they do so.

Q: You claim in your book that a lot of the aspects of modern science that we
touched on here have unexpectedly deep historical roots. What do you mean by
that?

Shapin: The present is always linked to the past, though when we come to
consider contemporary science, technology, and commercial organizations, much
rhetoric insists that we’ve never seen anything like this before. Of course, the
present is always different from the past, and historians who insist that
“there’s nothing new under the Sun” are usually just being professionally
silly. That said, we will understand “the way we live now” a lot better if we
appreciate how topics and sensibilities going back many centuries are a living
feature of the contemporary scene. I am a historian, and most of my previous
work has dealt with the seventeenth-century Scientific Revolution. Inevitably, I
bring what I have learnt from my previous work to interpreting late modern
American science and technology and especially, the texture of contemporary
scientific life.

We’ve always needed to know something about people in order to know something
about the natural world- not just their expertise but also their integrity.
Answers to questions about the people who speak for reality may differ
historically, but we still need such answers.

The Scientific Life deals with twentieth-century debates over “teamwork”: some
people said that scientific knowledge was essentially individualistic; others
thought that the modern invention of teamwork was a great contribution to
scientific advance. What are the social and institutional conditions from which
knowledge emerges and in which innovation happens? In Antiquity and the early
modern period, there was a great debate over the relative virtues of what were
called the “active” and the “contemplative” lives. Did virtue attach to living
alone or living in and for society? Did proper knowledge arise from a solitary
or a social condition? Again, the sensibilities are old, even if their
contemporary meanings are particular to our circumstances.

The Way We Live Now is new and old at the same time.

Glossary

Ennobling : giving someone a sense of dignity and honour Cultural lag : the
delay between changes in society and the adjustment of cultural ideas or
attitudes. Propitious : favourable or likely to lead to success Altruism :
selfless concern for the well-being of others Venture capitalist : an investor
who provides money to new, high-risk businesses in exchange for potential
profits Commercializable : capable of being turned into a product or service
that can be sold Charismatic authority : influence based on a leader’s charm,
personal appeal or inspirational qualities. Dogmatic : insisting that one’s
opinions are correct without considering other views.
