=== SSLC Physics March 2023 Question Paper with Answers (EM) ===

Students can read Kerala SSLC Physics Question Paper March 2023 with Answers English Medium and Kerala SSLC Physics Previous Year Question Papers with Answers helps you to score more marks in your examinations. Kerala Syllabus Class 10 Physics Question Paper March 2023 with Answers English Medium Time: 1½ hours Score: 40 Instructions: The first 15 minutes is cool-off time. You may use the time to read the questions and plan your answers. Answer only based on instructions and questions given. Consider score and time while answering. Section &#8211; A Answer any four questions. Each question carries 1 score. Question 1. The prominent effect produced when a current passes through a solenoid is _________ (1) [chemical effect, mechanical effect, magnetic effect, light effect] Answer: Magnetic Effect Question 2. When there is a change in magnetic flux linked with a conductor, an emf is induced in it. Name the phenomenon. (1) Answer: Electro Magnetic Induction Question 3. In mirrors which&#8217; point is considered as the origin while measuring distances according to the New Cartesian Sign Convention? (1) Answer: Pole Question 4. Which phenomenon of light is used in optical fibers that are used for communication? (1) Answer: Total Internal Reflection Question 5. What is the distance to the near point from an eye with healthy vision? (1) Answer: 25 cm/0.25 m Section &#8211; B Answer any four questions. Each question carries 2 scores. Question 6. (a) What is the main disadvantage of an incandescent lamp? (1) (b) Write any two properties of tungsten that make it suitable for being used as a filament. (1) Answer: (a) A major part of the electrical energy supplied to an incandescent lamp is lost as heat. (b) High resistivity High melting point Question 7. Observe the diagram. Two 16 Ω resistors are connected in series and a potential difference of 24 V is applied. (a) Calculate the effective resistance in the circuit. (1) (b) If the resistors were connected in parallel without changing the voltage source what would be the current in the circuit? (1) Answer: (a) R = R1 + R2 = 16 + 16 = 32 Ω Question 8. A conductor kept in a magnetic field experiences a force when current passes through it. (a) Name the rule that helps us to find the direction of the force. (1) (b) Name any two devices that work based on this principle. (1) Answer: (a) Fleming Left Hand Rule (b) Moving Coil Loudspeaker, Electric Motor. Question 9. Observe the diagram. (2) Redraw the ray diagram and complete it to show the image. Answer: Question 10. Match the following appropriately. (2) A B (a) Fuel Cell (i) Carbon (b) L.P.G. (ii) Methane (c) Coal (iii) Hydrogen (d) CNG (iv) Butane Answer: A B (a) Fuel Cell (iii) Hydrogen (b) L.P.G. (iv) Butane (c) Coal (i) Carbon (d) CNG (ii) Methane Section &#8211; C Answer any four questions. Each question carries 3 scores. Question 11. A DC passes through an insulated copper coil wound over a soft iron core as shown in the figure. (a) By just observing the experimental setup how will you identify the south pole of the electromagnet? (1) (b) Compare the properties of an electromagnet and a permanent bar magnet. (2) Answer: (a) The end of the solenoid at which current flows in the clockwise direction will be the south pole. (b) Electromagnet Bar magnet The magnetism is temporary. The magnetism is permanent. Polarity can be changed. Polarity cannot be changed. The strength of the magnet can be changed. The strength of the magnet cannot be changed. Question 12. The current in the secondary coil of a transformer with no power loss is 5 A and that is the primary is 0.5 A. (a) What type of transformer is this? (1) (b) If the input voltage of this transformer is 240V calculate the output voltage. (2) Answer: (a) Step down transformer Question 13. A doctor’s prescription for a person with defective vision has the figures -1 D and -1.25 D. (a) What do these figures indicate? (1) (b) Identify the defect of the eye. (1) (c) Write the reason for this defect. (1) Answer: (a) Power of lens (b) Short-sightedness/Nearsightedness/Myopia (c) The size of the eyeball is larger/Power of the eye lens is high. Question 14. An object of height 6 cm is placed 10 cm away in front of a concave mirror. A real inverted image of a height of 3 cm is formed. (a) Find the magnification of the image. (1) (b) Calculate the distance of the image from the mirror. (2) Answer: Question 15. Observe the figure. A ray of light enters from medium-1 to medium-2. (a) Find out which medium has greater optical density. (1) (b) Explain the terms: (2) (i) relative refractive index (ii) absolute refractive index Answer: (a) Medium-1 (b) (i) Relative refractive index: The refractive index of one medium for another medium is called relative refractive index. (ii) Absolute refractive index: The refractive index of a medium for vacuum is called the absolute refractive index. Section &#8211; D Answer any four questions. Each question carries 4 scores. Question 16. A heating coil with 60 Ω resistance is connected to a 240 V supply. (a) Calculate the power of the appliance. (1) (b) Calculate the amount of heat generated by this heating coil in 5 minutes. (1) (c) If this appliance continuously works for 10 hours, calculate the energy consumed in commercial units. (2) Answer: Question 17. AC generators are used in power stations in our Country. (a) What is the voltage produced by the generators in our power stations? (1) (b) What do you mean by transmission loss? (1) (c) Explain how it is minimized. (2) Answer: (a) 11000 V (11 kV) (b) When electrical energy is transmitted through conducting wires, energy is wasted in the form of heat. As H = I 2 Rt, for reducing H, I and R are to be decreased. As P = VI, For decreasing I without affecting the power, voltage V is to be increased before transmission. Question 18. An object is placed at a distance of 15 cm from a lens of focal length +10 cm. (a) Which type of lens is used here? (1) (b) Calculate the image distance. (2) (c) What is the nature of the image formed? (1) Answer: (a) Convex lens (b) u = -15 cm f = +10 cm ∴ V = 30 cm (c) Inverted, Real Question 19. The red colour during sunset and the beautiful rainbow make nature colourful. (a) Name the phenomenon that creates a rainbow. (1) (b) What is the colour seen at the upper edge of the primary rainbow? (1) (c) Suring sunset sun seems to be in red. Explain why? (2) Answer: (a) Dispersion (b) Red (c) During sunset, sunlight reaching us from the horizon has to travel a long distance through the atmosphere. Colours of shorter wavelength would be at most fully lost due to scattering. Red light which has a longer wavelength undergoes less scattering. That decides the colour of the horizon. Question 20. Kalpakkam, Moolamattom, and Neyveli are some places where power stations are located. (a) Which among the above is a nuclear power station? (1) (b) Explain the energy changes taking place in a nuclear power station. (2) (c) What type of pollution is caused by such power stations? (1) Answer: (a) Kalpakkam (b) Nuclear Energy → Heat Energy → Mechanical Energy → Electrical Energy. (c) Nuclear Pollution