=== Class X_Social Science-I Chapter_3 Folder ===

--- PAGE 47 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p047_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p047_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p047_02.jpg (fig_ch03_p047_02)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p047_03.jpg (fig_ch03_p047_03)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p047_04.jpg (fig_ch03_p047_04)]
3

SOCIAL ANALYSIS: THROUGH
SOCIOLOGICAL IMAGINATION
Monsoon. People hardly get any work
here. I was studying in ninth standard
at that time. I went to the shop with my
father to buy groceries. On seeing my
father, the shop keeper reminded him
that he had to pay him a significant
amount for the things he had purchased
earlier. My father gave him whatever
money he had in his hand. On that day
he agonised over it. I realised the value
of money even if it was one rupee. The
cause of our problems was that we did
not have money. I am confident that
everything will soon become right.

I cannot give you
anything more on
credit. I also have
financial difficulties

Given here is a portion of note prepared by Anu as per the instructions of her teacher
to share her experiences about a rainy season. What are the problems mentioned
here that Anu and her family face?
• Limited opportunities of employment during rainy season
•


--- PAGE 48 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p048_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p048_01)]
Standard - X

Social Science I

If we had the money,
my father wouldn't have
borrowed or he would have
repaid it on time.

If we had the money,
we wouldn't have any
of these problems.

I know many people
who live without
problems because they
have enough money.

Anu is thinking what could be the reasons for her problems.
Anu concludes lack of availability of money as the cause of her
and her family’s problems. Anu believes the problems she is
experiencing is due to personal reasons. Why would Anu think
like this?
To understand personal problems many people rely on superficial
reasons. Individuals also try to understand the reasons for
their problems basing it on their previous experiences. Others
understand the causes for their personal problems through the
information that they gather from the interaction with others
and their experiences. Individual problems are generally
analysed using the knowledge and practices acquired through
the process of socialisation by some people. It is on the basis of
such commonsense knowledge that individuals often find the
causes of their problems.

Commonsense Knowledge
Commonsense Knowledge is the direct understanding individuals
acquire about the world through personal experiences, social
interactions and cultural knowledge.

48


--- PAGE 49 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p049_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p049_01)]
Social Analysis: Through Sociological Imagination

This is not formal knowledge. Rather they are assumption or even
everyday practical knowledge. The notion that “The Sun rises
in the East and sets in the West” is an individual's perception
of a natural phenomenon. Similarly, the knowledge that 'fire
will burn' is a basic understanding of the nature of fire. This
knowledge is acquired through observation, experience and
socialisation.

Commonsense Knowledge and Social Analysis
We have now seen that individuals acquire
commonsense knowledge through their everyday
perceptions, practices and the knowledge of the
world around them. It is formed based on norms,
practices, beliefs and personal experiences which
are not often examined. Anu and her family face
the social problem of indebtedness. Will it be
possible to find the actual reasons for this if this
social problem is analysed through just the lens of
commonsense knowledge?
Now think about the reasons why a person
experiences poverty. People may also think that
poverty is due to a person’s laziness or disinterest
in work. Many people think that personal failure
is the only reason for poverty. Such perceptions
are formed through commonsense knowledge.

Social Problem
A social problem is a
problem or condition that
affects a large number
of people in society.
Problems that affect only a
single or a few individuals
are not considered as
social problems. A social
problem is considered as
undesirable or detrimental
to the society. Poverty,
inequality, discrimination,
environmental pollution are
some examples.

What are the ways in which commonsense
knowledge develop?
• Through personal experiences •
•

Through general observations

•

Can we always rely on commonsense knowledge for solving our
problems? Give reasons.

49


--- PAGE 50 ---
Standard - X

Social Science I

Given below are some of the statements based on commonsense
knowledge that exist at least in some part of the society.
1

Climate change is natural: Human
actions have no role in it.

2

A high score can be achieved only if you
study for longer hours.

3

Teenagers are always rebellious and
irresponsible.

4

Eating till you are full is good for
health

5

Providing temporary shelters can solve
housing problems

Let us analyse and see if these statements are completely true.
1

Note the statement that humans are not responsible for climate
change. What are the problems caused on earth due to climate
change?

• Global warming 

•

•

•

List human actions that cause global warming
• Burning of plastic

•

•

•

While observing these things, it can be seen that human actions
are also responsible for climate change and global warming. It
can thus be seen that this is a statement based on commonsense
knowledge. Such commonsense knowledge is often partial.

50


--- PAGE 51 ---
Social Analysis: Through Sociological Imagination

2

Note the statement that a high score can only be achieved
by studying for a longer time. Is it the same for everyone?
Do individual learning methods and styles affect learning?
Spending more time in learning alone does not make it
effective. What can be done along with this to achieve
academic excellence?
•

Group learning

•

Taking regular intervals and proper rest while studying

•
Therefore, the statement that a high score can only be achieved
by studying for a long time, is merely commonsense knowledge
derived from speculations or practices. Commonsense
knowledge thus relies on speculations and practices.
3

4

It is a general statement to make that teenagers are always
rebellious and irresponsible. Such general statements, beliefs
or ideas are referred to stereotype. When observed in this
way, it can be seen that the statement about teenagers is a
stereotype. Such stereotype creates misconception about
teenagers. Teenagers are indeed a heterogeneous group,
usually showing responsibility and mutual respect. But such
stereotypical statements lead to a lack of trust in teenagers.
Moreover it results in misplaced assumptions about their
behaviour. Now, you can see how commonsense knowledge
is often based upon stereotypes.
The statement that eating till you are full is good for health
is a part of commonsense knowledge. Such statements are
based only on day to day observations without a detailed
understanding of nutrition and health. Commonsense
knowledge usually provides only partial understanding of
such a concept. Commonsense knowledge is often not
based on scientific observation or studies.

51


--- PAGE 52 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p052_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p052_01)]
Standard - X

Social Science I
5

Now approach the problem of housing through commonsense
knowledge. Some may think that it is just a personal choice
or a problem of not trying to secure permanent housing.
Those who think so, may imagine that temporary safety,
and housing, or vocational training can solve the problem
permanently. But are there other reasons behind housing
problems? What are they?
• Financial instability

 •

• Unemployment
•

Commonsense knowledge often fails to discover the real causes
behind the problems. It can be seen that all the topics covered
in the above mentioned five statements are related to complex
social problems. Individual problems or complex social
problems cannot be understood properly using commonsense
knowledge.
Relies on
speculations
or practices
Bases itself on
stereotypes

Provides only
partial knowledge
Limitations of
Commonsense
knowledge
Complex social
problems cannot
be understood

Not based on
scientific
observations or
studies.

Find more examples of commonsense knowledge and make notes
discussing the limitations of the knowledge gained through it.

52


--- PAGE 53 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p053_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p053_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p053_02.jpg (fig_ch03_p053_02)]
Social Analysis: Through Sociological Imagination

Approaching personal and social problems only through
commonsense knowledge will not provide enough knowledge for
proper solutions. It can be seen that Anu thought about the cause
of her problems only based on commonsense knowledge.
Anu thought that the reasons for the problems they are facing is
only because they do not have enough money. But aren’t there
many other factors that can contribute to Anu’s problems? What
are they?

Problems

Factors

Anu’s family has no steady
source of income

Financial

Income varies with change of
season

Environment

Limited employment
opportunities during rainy
season (Limitations of the
administration to provide
alternative systems to intervene
and solve economic problems)

Administrative

Problems faced by people living
in different geographical
areas.

Geographical
disparities

Here, we can see that factors such as environment, geography,
administration and finance all contribute to the problems in
Anu's family. Now, do you notice that financial insecurity is
not the only reason behind Anu’s problem but many other social
factors?

Social Factors
Social factors include various elements of society that influence the behaviour,
attitude, opportunities and choices of individuals. These include family, education,
peer groups, religion, caste system, economic status, environment, cultural norms,
values, governance system, politics, technology, media and many more.

53


--- PAGE 54 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p054_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p054_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p054_02.jpg (fig_ch03_p054_02)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p054_03.jpg (fig_ch03_p054_03)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p054_04.jpg (fig_ch03_p054_04)]
Social Science I

Standard - X

We can see that Anu’s personal problem is also a social problem.
Social factors influence each and every personal problem. We can
understand individual problems and their causes in greater depth
and breadth only when we identify the influence of social factors
behind them. Mention a recent personal problem you have had.
List the social factors that influenced it.
Observe the pictures
Job
vacancies - 3

Based on the pictures, list the individual problems and identify the
social factors behind them.
Serial No.

Individual Problems

Social Factors

1

2
3

You would have identified now that there are many social factors
behind individual problems. By analysing these factors, we can
identify the cause-effect relationship and consequences of the
social problems. Observed thus, it can be seen that individual
problems are related to wider social structures.
Social analysis is the process of examining how social
relationships, social institutions, social structures and social
problems affect individuals and society. Social analysis, helps
us to develop a deeper understanding of the factors that
influence various social situations and provide suggestions for
their improvement.

54


--- PAGE 55 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p055_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p055_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p055_02.jpg (fig_ch03_p055_02)]
Social Analysis: Through Sociological Imagination

Sociology
Sociology is the scientific study of society. Sociology can observe, analyse and
interpret relationships, social institutions and structures in society. Karl Marx, Emile
Durkheim, Max Weber were prominent among its early thinkers. Some important
concepts used in sociology for social analysis are social relationships, social
institutions, social structures, etc.
Social relationships are the relations and interactions that individuals develop
from within the society. The basis of social relations is social structures and social
institutions. The cooperation, care and affection of the members of the family as a
social institution and the deep bonds, contacts and togetherness formed through
friendships are examples of social relations.
Social institutions are the framework of rules established by society to stabilise
and regulate social relations. They define and shape our actions and behaviour
while explaining society's perspectives. Along with that, it assimilates generally
accepted values and reflects them in the actions of individuals, leading society
towards progress. Examples include family, marriage, religion, political institutions,
economic institutions, educational institutions, judicial institutions and so on.
The social structure explains and implements the status, roles, existence and
responsibility of individuals in the society. Norms and rules of society are the
examples of social structure. These provide order and stability to the society.

Have you noticed the various factors of the problem that Anu is
experiencing are related to wider social structures? Sociological
imagination is the skill to identify and analyse how individual
problems are related to broader social structures. The
concept of sociological imagination was introduced in
the book The Sociological Imagination (1959) by American
Sociologist Charles Wright Mills. He proposed this
concept as a skill that helps to see individual problems
as part of the wider social structure. The sociological
imagination envisages a way of identifying individual
Charles Wright Mills
problems and their causes and explaining them by subjecting
them to wider observation and analysis.

55


--- PAGE 56 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p056_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p056_01)]
Standard - X

Social Science I

Sociological Imagination and Social Analysis
The social causes behind all personal problems can be identified
through sociological imagination. Sociological imagination helps
us to understand how social structures influence our lives and
that of others. Sociological imagination enables individuals to
move beyond their life situations and view their experiences and
personal problems in the context of broader social structure. Now,
let us examine the characteristics of sociological imagination.

1. Broadens individual perspective
Observe the picture

Does an individual meet with an accident only because of
carelessness. There could be other reasons behind it. What are
they?




Sociological imagination reveals that there are many other factors
resulting in road accidents. For instance, violation of traffic rules,
over crowding of vehicles, limited transportation facilities, failure
of legal system, unscientific way of construction of roads and so
on.
Sociological imagination helps to identify how other social factors
influence individual problems and thus broaden the individual’s
perspective.

56


--- PAGE 57 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p057_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p057_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p057_02.jpg (fig_ch03_p057_02)]
Social Analysis: Through Sociological Imagination

Suicide Rate and Society
Emile Durkheim, one among the founders of Sociology,
studied the social causes behind suicide at a time when
suicide was only seen as a personal matter. He found that
people commit suicide for social reasons more than personal
ones. He presented his findings in the book Suicide (1897).

Emile Durkheim
(1858-1917)

2. Understanding social issues in depth
Look at the table

Labour force participation rate in India by gender status
2017-2023
Year

Labour Participation rate
Male

Female

2017-2018

75.1

21.1

2018-2019

74.9

21.6

2019-2020

75.8

26.3

2020-2021

75.8

27.5

2021-2022

75.9

27.2

2022-2023

77.4

31.6

Source: Periodic Labour Force Survey Report, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.

The table shows the labour force participation rate in India by
gender for the period of 2017 to 2023. Labour force participation is
a major factor influencing the economic development of a region.
Notice the gap between the labour force participation rate of men
and women in different years.
The commonsense knowledge is that women are not coming
forward as workforce. Sociological imagination helps us to think
that there are other factors behind the decline in the number of
women in the work force. When we examine the reasons behind
the decrease in the number of women in the workforce, we can
find that there are many social factors related to gender status.

57


--- PAGE 58 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p058_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p058_01)]
Standard - X

Social Science I

Some societies expect ‘men’ to be responsible for providing
for the entire family, while ‘women’ are to remain at home as
the caretaker of the family. This is a gender norm that limits
employment opportunities for women. Due to this, women are
not able to engage in income generating jobs. This contributes to
the economic backwardness of women. In some societies, boys
have more opportunities for education than girls. This results
in the educational backwardness of women and lower labour
force participation. We can trace various cultural, economic, and
educational factors behind the gender status gap in labour force
participation among women, using the concept of sociological
imagination.
Sociological imagination helps to identify the relationship
between individual problems and social issues. It also helps in
gaining deeper understanding of the social issues.

3. Enables self - reflection
Read the extracts from Ishan’s speech at his school reunion.
I was an Engineer. When I was young,
I wanted to be a painter. But neither my
teachers nor my parents were interested
in me taking up painting as a career.
Eventually, I also thought the same and
decided to become an Engineer. I was
under the impression that I became an
engineer by my choice. But I was not
satisfied with it. When I pondered over it,
I realised that I became an engineer not because of my decision, but rather by
the opinion of parents, teachers and friends. Thus, I was influenced by many.
I have retired from engineering as a profession and moved into painting, and
I am happy now.
Whose influence does Ishan find behind his choice to become an
engineer?
•

58

Parents

 

•

 •


--- PAGE 59 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p059_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p059_01)]
Social Analysis: Through Sociological Imagination

Ishan realised this when he critically evaluated his decision. Selfreflexivity is the skill to critically evaluate one’s own thoughts
and actions. Ishan realised this upon self-reflection.
Apart from understanding the social factors behind individual
problems, sociological imagination helps to realise more about
oneself and exercise self-reflection.
Self-reflection enables us to identify the social causes behind
individual problems. This allows for broader understanding by
moving away from the confines of commonsense knowledge. In
this way, sociological imagination is beneficial at both individual
and societal levels.

4. Develops empathy and tolerance
Imagine that a child in your class consistently
gets low scores and is not active in studies.
What are the possible conclusions you would
reach when you think about the reasons for
this based on commonsense knowledge .


Laziness




But when you approach the problem through
the lens of sociological imagination, you can
see the influence of wider social factors on
the child’s learning and behaviour. What are
they?



Family background



Limited access to resources



When you approach the problem in this manner, you will
develop empathy towards the child and will be able to provide
support and encouragement. By understanding the social context
behind the experiences of others, individuals can approach
them from diverse perspectives. Empathy and tolerance can be
developed through this.

59


--- PAGE 60 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p060_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p060_01)]
Standard - X

Social Science I

5. Develops critical thinking
Priya was born and brought up in a village.
After completing her education, she migrated
to the city in search of better employment and
living conditions. But she found it difficult to
find work and secure accommodation there.
Though she got a job after sometime she soon
lost it. Priya then approached the labour office.
She thought that losing her job was a problem
that happened only to her. But at the labour
office, she realised that there were many
migrants in the city who had lost their jobs like her. By interacting with them
and the labour office, Priya got some knowledge about the problems faced
by migrants and their rights. Based on that, Priya tried to think critically
about the issues and started actively engaging in activities to improve the
conditions of the migrants. Gradually she was able to improve the conditions
of others as well as herself.

This was the experience of Priya who migrated from village to
the city for work. What were the personal problems that Priya
and other migrants experienced in common?

•

•

 

Critical thinking enabled Priya to recognise that most migrants
faced similar problems like hers. She was also able to find that
other social factors also influence individual problems. Hence
Priya was able to improve her circumstances and support others.
In this way critical thinking based on sociological imagination
helps individuals to understand how various social factors
influence their lives.

60


--- PAGE 61 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p061_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p061_01)]
Social Analysis: Through Sociological Imagination

6. Questioning negative social norms.
Rinu lives in a small town. With a
satisfying job and family, he believed
Mental Health
Seminar
that there were no flaws in his life. But
he often felt anxiety and depression.
He was afraid that if he shared this
with anyone, they would think he was
mentally unstable and would be isolated.
So he did not disclose it to anyone. Once
he attended a seminar on mental health.
From the lectures and discussions held
there by the mental health experts, he understood that mental health is
as important as physical health. He realised that it was difficult for him
to share his condition with others because there existed some negative
social norms and stereotyping about mental health in society. He shared
his mental issues with his friends. Together they started working to
create social awareness about the importance of mental health.

Have you read Rinu’s experience? Do you realise that mental
health is just as important as physical health? This awareness
will inspire us to question the negative social norms that exist in
society about mental health.
Sociological imagination also helps to understand the influence
of social institutions like family, educational institutions
and financial institutions on individual choices and their
consequences.
Social factors can be seen behind every individual problem.
Approaching only through commonsense knowledge
will not help developing a social perspective. Social
factors behind individual problems need to be identified.
We should be able to analyse individual and social
problems by looking beyond commonsense knowledge.

61


--- PAGE 62 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p062_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p062_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p062_02.jpg (fig_ch03_p062_02)]
Standard - X

Social Science I

The sociological imagination enables to see individual problems
as social problems rather than mere personal failures.
The reasons behind various social problems can be grasped
through sociological imagination. This increases the possibility
of intervention in problem solving and will help in formulating
more effective social policies. Thus, sociological imagination
helps to formulate social policies and strive for social change.

Characteristics of
Sociological
Imagination

Broader individual
perspective
Understanding of social
issues in depth
Self - reflection
Empathy and tolerance
Critical thinking

Sociological imagination
has no boundaries

To question negative
social norms

Observe your personal experiences and social problems in everyday
life and record them in a journal. Find out how such social issues and
individual experiences relate to broader social contexts using sociological
imagination. Analyse the findings and write them down in the journal.
Make a digital presentation of your analytical note and discuss it in the
Social Science club.

62


--- PAGE 63 ---
Social Analysis: Through Sociological Imagination

Commonsense Knowledge and Sociological Imagination
Sociology seeks its knowlege beyond commonsense knowledge.
Sociological enquiry helps in understanding and explaining
commonsense knowledge. Commonsense knowledge and
sociological imagination are different ways of understanding
the society around us. These are interrelated but distinct ideas of
sociology. By integrating these two ideas, individuals can engage
critically with society and avoid viewpoints based only on
commonsense. Consequently, individuals develop the ability to
differentiate the complexities of social realities, social behaviour
and social problems. Let us see how commonsense knowledge
and sociological imagination differ in analysing social problems.
Commonsense Knowledge
Approach

Sociological Imagination
Approach

Limited to personal views and
experiences

Its scope is broad as it connects
individual experiences to larger social
structures

Often provides only a superficial
explanation based on stereotypes

Analyses deeply the impact of social
factors on individuals

Social realities and problems are
not approached through critical
thinking

Encourages critical thinking about
interrelationships between personal
experiences and social structures

Sociological imagination helps to find the micro-macro
relationship between individual and society. It equips us to
engage in social activities and enables us to understand and
address the complex interrelationships between individual lives
and social structures. Sociological imagination thus becomes a
powerful tool, skill and approach that enriches social life.

63


--- PAGE 64 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p064_01.jpg (fig_ch03_p064_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p064_02.jpg (fig_ch03_p064_02)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch03_p064_03.jpg (fig_ch03_p064_03)]
Standard - X

Social Science I

Try to find out the causes of social problems given in the table through the
approaches of commonsense knowledge and sociological imagination.
Social Problems
1. Poverty

2. Unemployment

3. Academic
Pressure

Commonsense
Sociological Imagination
Knowledge Approach
Approach
• Lack of interest in • Uneven distribution
hard work
of resources
•

•

• Laziness

• Population growth

•

•

• Fear of failure

• Pressure from school
to get high score

•

•

What are the differences found when approaching the same problem
through commonsense knowledge and through sociological imagination?
Form different groups and discuss the differences between the two
approaches and present them in the class.

Extended Activities
1.

Prepare a short speech to present in school assembly on ‘The need of
Sociological Imagination for healthy social life.'

2.

Collect news of contemporary social issues that appeared in different
media. Compare how they have presented the same social issue. Find out
how different media have presented them using sociological imagination.

3.

Prepare a presentation in the social science club which reflects the
interventions that you have made using your sociological imagination
skills.

64
