Unit 2 On the Rule of the Road A.G. Gardiner

Introduction Alfred George Gardiner was born on 12 June 1865 at Chelmsford,
Essex, England as the son of Henry James Gardiner, an alcoholic cabinet-maker
and Susanna Taylor. He was a journalist, editor and author. His essays were
written in the name of “Alpha of the Plough” in a London evening newspaper, The
Star. He was also a social reformer who campaigned for a minimum wage in
industry. He married Ada and had six children. He was appointed as an editor of
Blackburn Weekly Telegraph in 1899.

Gardiner’s style of language is simple without unnecessary jargon or complexity.
His essays are organized logically and coherently with appropriate transitions
and examples. He supported his arguments with facts and evidence, without being
dogmatic or biased. His essays are classified as narrative, descriptive,
reflective, and persuasive. Humour, irony and satire contribute to his literary
style.

His significant contributions include Prophets, Priests and Kings (1908),
Pillars of Society (1913), The War Lords (1915), Pebbles on the Shore Windfalls
(1920), Leaves in the Wind (1920), The Anglo-American Future (1920), What I saw
in Germany: letters from Germany and Austria (1920), Life of George Cadbury
(1923), The Life of Sir William Harcourt (2 vols.) (1923), Many Furrows (1924),
John Benn and the Progressive Movement (1925), and Portraits and Portents
(1926).

‘On the Rule of the Road’ is an essay taken from the compilation titled Leaves
in the Wind by A G Gardiner. This essay deals with the manners of the people on
the road and how important it is to obey traffic rules. In essence it is about
proper conduct. His attitude towards life was optimistic and his essays portray
a humorous representation. The emphasis is on constraints and how manners of the
people are important on the road. The style of the essay is conversational. The
term ‘the rule of the road’ indicates the laws and regulations that govern
traffic on roads. He advocates obeying traffic laws is indispensable to ensure
safety on the road and prevent accidents. These simple thoughts about traffic
rules make us ponder on larger issues that concern liberty and responsibility
and the limits of freedom. It should broaden our ideas regarding rights and
duties of a responsible citizen. Can there be limitless freedom for an
individual in a society? Can there be rights without responsibilities? What is
the place of discipline in a society? Please read the essay to find it out.

Text A stout old lady was walking with her basket down the middle of a street in
Petrograd to the great confusion of the traffic and with no small peril to
herself. It was pointed out to her that the pavement was the place for
foot-passengers, but she replied: “I’m going to walk where I like. We’ve got
liberty now.” It did not occur to the dear old lady that if liberty entitled the
foot-passenger to walk down the middle of the road it also entitled the
cab-driver to drive on the pavement, and that the end of such liberty would be
universal chaos. Everybody would be getting in everybody else’s way and nobody
would get anywhere. Individual liberty would have become social anarchy.

There is a danger of the world getting liberty-drunk in these days like the old
lady with the basket, and it is just as well to remind ourselves of what the
rule of the road means. It means that in order that the liberties of all may be
preserved the liberties of everybody must be curtailed. When the policeman, say,
at Piccadilly Circus steps into the middle of the road and puts up his hand, he
is the symbol not of tyranny, but of liberty. You may not think so. You may,
being in a hurry and seeing your motor-car pulled up by this insolence of
office, feel that your liberty has been outraged. How dare this fellow interfere
with your free use of the public highway? Then, if you are a reasonable person,
you will reflect that if he did not, incidentally, interfere with you he would
interfere with no one, and the result would be that Piccadilly Circus would be a
maelstrom that you would never cross at all. You have submitted to a curtailment
of private liberty in order that you may enjoy a social order which makes your
liberty a reality.

Liberty is not a personal affair only, but a social contract. It is an
accommodation of interests. In matters which do not touch anybody else’s
liberty, of course, I may be as free as I like. If I choose to go down the
Strand in a dressing-gown, with long hair and bare feet, who shall say me nay?
You have liberty to laugh at me, but I have liberty to be indifferent to you.
And if I have a fancy for dyeing my hair, or waxing my moustache (which heaven
forbid), or wearing a tall hat, a frock-coat and sandals, or going to bed late
or getting up early, I shall follow my fancy and ask no man’s permission. I
shall not inquire of you whether I may eat mustard with my mutton. I may like
mustard with my mutton. And you will not ask me whether you may be a Protestant
or a Catholic, whether you may marry the dark lady or the fair lady, whether you
may prefer Ella Wheeler Wilcox to Wordsworth, or champagne to shandygaff.

In all these and a thousand other details you and I please ourselves and ask no
one’s leave. We have a whole kingdom, in which we rule alone, can do what we
choose, be wise or ridiculous, harsh or easy, conventional or odd. But directly
we step out of that kingdom our personal liberty of action becomes qualified by
other people’s liberty. I might like to practice on the trombone from midnight
till three in the morning. If I went on to the top of Helvellyn to do it I could
please myself, but if I do it in my bedroom my family will object, and if I do
it out in the streets the neighbours will remind me that my liberty to blow the
trombone must not interfere with their liberty to sleep in quiet. There are a
lot of people in the world, and I have to accommodate my liberty to their
liberties.

We are all liable to forget this, and unfortunately we are much more conscious
of the imperfections of others in this respect than of our own.

I got into a railway carriage at a country station the other morning and settled
down for what the schoolboys would call an hour’s “swot” at a Blue-book. I was
not reading it for pleasure. The truth is that I never do read Blue-books for
pleasure. I read them as a barrister reads a brief, for the very humble purpose
of turning an honest penny out of them. Now, if you are reading a book for
pleasure it doesn’t matter what is going on around you. I think I could enjoy
“Tristram Shandy” or “Treasure Island” in the midst of an earthquake. But when
you are reading a thing as a task you need reasonable quiet, and that is what I
didn’t get, for at the next station in came a couple of men, one of whom talked
to his friend for the rest of the journey in a loud and pompous voice. He was
one of those people who remind one of that story of Horne Tooke who, meeting a
person of immense swagger in the street, stopped him and said, “Excuse me, sir,
but are you someone in particular?” This gentleman was someone in particular. As
I wrestled with clauses and sections, his voice rose like a gale, and his family
history, the deeds of his sons in the war, and his criticisms of the generals
and the politicians submerged my poor attempts to hang on to my job. I shut up
the Blue-book, looked out of the window, and listened wearily while the voice
thundered on with themes like these: “Now what French ought to have done...”
“The mistake the Germans made...” “If only Asquith had...” You know the sort
of stuff. I had heard it all before, oh, so often. It was like a barrel-organ
groaning out some banal song of long ago.

If I had asked him to be good enough to talk in a lower tone I daresay he would
have thought I was a very rude fellow. It did not occur to him that anybody
could have anything better to do than to listen to him, and I have no doubt he
left the carriage convinced that everybody in it had, thanks to him, had a very
illuminating journey, and would carry away a pleasing impression of his
encyclopaedic range. He was obviously a well-intentioned person. The thing that
was wrong with him was that he had not the social sense. He was not “a clubbable
man.”

A reasonable consideration for the rights or feelings of others is the
foundation of social conduct. It is commonly alleged against women that in this
respect they are less civilised than men, and I am bound to confess that in my
experience it is the woman – the well-dressed woman – who thrusts herself in
front of you at the ticket office. The man would not attempt it, partly because
he knows the thing would not be tolerated from him, but also because he has been
better drilled in the small give-and-take of social relationships. He has lived
more in the broad current of the world, where you have to learn to accommodate
yourself to the general standard of conduct, and his school life, his club life,
and his games have in this respect given him a training that women are only now
beginning to enjoy.

I believe that the rights of small people and quiet people are as important to
preserve as the rights of small nationalities. When I hear the aggressive,
bullying horn which some motorists deliberately use, I confess that I feel
something boiling up in me which is very like what I felt when Germany came
trampling like a bully over Belgium. By what right, my dear sir, do you go along
our highways uttering that hideous curse on all who impede your path? Cannot you
announce your coming like a gentleman? Cannot you take your turn? Are you
someone in particular or are you simply a hot gospeller of the prophet
Nietzsche? I find myself wondering what sort of a person it is who can sit
behind that hog-like outrage without realising that he is the spirit of Prussia
incarnate, and a very ugly spectacle in a civilised world.

And there is the more harmless person who has bought a very blatant gramophone,
and on Sunday afternoon sets the thing going, opens the windows and fills the
street with “Keep the Home Fires Burning” or some similar banality. What are the
right limits of social behaviour in a matter of this sort? Let us take the
trombone as an illustration again. Hazlitt said that a man who wanted to learn
that fearsome instrument was entitled to learn it in his own house, even though
he was a nuisance to his neighbours, but it was his business to make the
nuisance as slight as possible. He must practise in the attic, and shut the
window. He had no right to sit in his front room, open the window, and blow his
noise into his neighbours’ ears with the maximum of violence. And so with the
gramophone. If you like the gramophone you are entitled to have it, but you are
interfering with the liberties of your neighbours if you don’t do what you can
to limit the noise to your own household. Your neighbours may not like “Keep the
Home Fires Burning.” They may prefer to have their Sunday afternoon undisturbed,
and it is as great an impertinence for you to wilfully trespass on their peace
as it would be to go, unasked, into their gardens and trample on their flower
beds.

There are cases, of course, where the clash of liberties seems to defy
compromise. My dear old friend X, who lives in a West End square and who is an
amazing mixture of good nature and irascibility, flies into a passion when he
hears a street piano, and rushes out to order it away. But nearby lives a
distinguished lady of romantic picturesque tastes, who dotes on street pianos,
and attracts them as wasps are attracted to a jar of jam. Whose liberty in this
case should surrender to the other? For the life of me I cannot say. It is as
reasonable to like street pianos as to dislike them – and vice versa. I would
give much to hear Sancho Panza’s solution of such a nice riddle.

I suppose the fact is that we can be neither complete anarchists nor complete
Socialists in this complex world – or rather we must be a judicious mixture of
both. We have both liberties to preserve – our individual liberty and our social
liberty. We must watch the bureaucrat on the one side and warn off the anarchist
on the other. I am neither a Marxist, nor a Tolstoyan, but a compromise. I shall
not permit any authority to say that my child must go to this school or that,
shall specialise in science or arts, shall play rugger or soccer. These things
are personal. But if I proceed to say that my child shall have no education at
all, that he shall be brought up as a primeval savage, or at Mr. Fagin’s academy
for pickpockets, then Society will politely but firmly tell me that it has no
use for primeval savages and a very stern objection to pickpockets, and that my
child must have a certain minimum of education whether I like it or not. I
cannot have the liberty to be a nuisance to my neighbours or make my child a
burden and a danger to the commonwealth.

It is in the small matters of conduct, in the observance of the rule of the
road, that we pass judgment upon ourselves, and declare that we are civilised or
uncivilised. The great moments of heroism and sacrifice are rare. It is the
little habits of commonplace intercourse that make up the great sum of life and
sweeten or make bitter the journey. I hope my friend in the railway carriage
will reflect on this. Then he will not cease, I am sure, to explain to his
neighbour where French went wrong and where the Germans went ditto; but he will
do it in a way that will permit me to read my Blue-book undisturbed.

Glossary Piccadilly Circus: A famous road junction and public space in London’s
West End. It’s known for its bright lights, large advertising displays, and the
Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain topped with the statue of Anteros (often
mistakenly called Eros). Trombone: a musical instrument Helvellyn: is a mountain
in the English Lake District. Swot: hard work Blue book: a register or directory
of socially prominent persons. Barrel organ: a kind of musical organ Anarchy: A
state of society without government or law, often characterized by chaos and
disorder. Social Contract: The implicit agreement among individuals to cooperate
and respect each other’s rights and freedoms. Civility: Polite and respectful
behavior towards others, especially in public spaces. Asquith: a reference to
Lord Oxford (1852-1928), a British statesman and writer. Tristram Shandy: a
novel by Laurence Sterne. Treasure Island: an adventure novel by R.L. Stevenson.
