Unit 14 Stigma, Shame, and Silence Kalpana Jain

Introduction Kalpana Jain is an investigative journalist who raised her voice
for the betterment of public health and social justice. She has also contributed
in the field of religion writing and reporting. She was a renowned journalist at
The Times of India (health and population issues) and then moved on to become a
Kaiser International Health Journalism Fellow. She has proved herself as a
writer and researcher at Harvard. She has written extensively on public health
issues such as Tuberculosis, Malaria and recent outbreaks of fevers like Dengue
and Chikungunya. Her case study on modern-day slavery in India, and a woman’s
fight against it, is part of a Harvard course, and her book on the AIDS is part
of the curriculum at many Indian universities. Her greatest contribution to
health journalism is perhaps her extensive coverage of the AIDS epidemic which
she did with meticulous care; travelling to various affected parts of the
country and gathering information on and from several HIV positive people. She
succeeded in making people aware of this frightening new health hazard and
sensitising her readers towards the issue. As the editor of Health e-Letter,
Kalpana researches and publishes on a variety of health issues. She is also an
advocate of people’s rights.

Text As a child, Ashok used to watch with glee his paper boats bobbing in the
rainwater and then suddenly getting washed away. There was no sense of loss when
this happened. All he had to do was to make another boat. Today, standing on the
ship’s deck, he was reminded of his child-hood days; he wondered whether like
those paper boats his life too would flow away into oblivion. The thought left
him desolate and helpless, as never before.

Overcome by depression, he began brooding: there was no one who really cared for
him, no one who would even feel his loss when he was gone. Just knowing about
his HIV status had given even the most inept guys amongst his shipmates, a
feeling of enormous power, a sense of unreasonable superiority which led them to
behave as they liked with him. The more he thought about it, the angrier he got.

‘It is truly an unfair world,’ he said to himself. The moment people around you
felt you were weaker than them, they went all out to get you. And because he had
got HIV, even his friends had arrogated to them-selves the right to play with
his feelings, “to rough up” his emotions. Perhaps, another person in his place
would not have been able to take these constant humiliations.

For a long time, Ashok intently kept observing the waves as they lashed against
the ship. Unpleasant thoughts flashed through his mind as he tried to figure out
how he should go about ordering his new life. Soon he realized this was all a
matter of how he channelled his energies. They should certainly not be frittered
away in anger, he decided.

The best way he could deal with the rejection he felt, was to learn to ignore
it. Also, if he kept out of everyone’s way, he wouldn’t have to bear the torture
of indifference. To survive, he would have to make a habit of pretending not to
hear those rude remarks, as well as try not to notice people’s contemptuous
attitude towards him. He couldn’t afford to get into any arguments or fights.
Only he would be the loser. So, he counselled himself. Above all, he did not
want to give others more of an opportunity to express their superiority.

In this way he learnt to protect himself early on, starting with the Command
Hospital, Pune, where he was sent for testing.

The doctor there had been brutal. He had delivered the news to him like a death
sentence. No mincing of words. No trappings of hope. He had looked at him and
said, “You know you are positive.” Just five words, conveyed with surgical
precision.

It requires great strength of spirit to be able to bear such a sentence - a
death sentence that is without appeal. It is worse than being a criminal, who is
to be hanged for violating the norms of civil society.

Ashok could feel the doctor point the finger at him; he was jeering at him, his
eyes mocking him. He seemed to say, you deserve this for what you have done.
There can be no sympathy for you. You are condemned to die for your deeds.

Had it been another terminal illness, things would have been so different.

He could have reached out to his family. His mother, his sisters, would consult
the best doctors and extend their support. In this, he was alone. This was his
shame, and he had to hide it. Battling thoughts of early death, he had to
continue living, to earn enough for himself and to send some-thing home.

Ashok looked at the doctor. It seemed he was waiting for him to break down, sob
uncontrollably and weep his heart out as he admitted his guilt. At this point
the doctor would get up, put an arm around him, to offer him solace. Wearing
that look of moral superiority Ashok detested, he’d add that atonement for his
sins was possible if he did not commit them any-more.

Moral superiority? Would he be judged only by his HIV status hence-forth?
Looking up at the doctor again, he felt his entire body imploding with laughter.
Somehow, he managed to control himself. The doctor was watching him. At least
for the sake of form, Ashok scolded himself, he should appear to be composed.
The doctor believed the message had not registered. He persisted: ‘You are
suffering from AIDS. Do you understand? Your life is short. Your immunity will
go down. You will get lots of diseases. Eventually you’ll die.’

He looked up, quite confident that Ashok must be terrified by now and would beg
for mercy. There were no such signs. As Ashok showed no response the doctor
wrote on his discharge slip, ‘Not to have sex.’

Ashok stared in disbelief at this piece of paper. He wanted to hit this man,
trying to be a doctor. Being a doctor was all about healing. And here he was
trying to hurt him instead. Perhaps this was his way of expressing satisfaction
that he belonged to a part of society that could look away even as the virus
chose to attack young people.

He looked at the doctor again. Hitting him was out. He did the next best thing;
he started laughing. The doctor was taken aback. What was happening to this man;
he had never seen an HIV patient behave in this manner. Usually, they would
break down, talk about their fears, their family, and their hopeless future. He
was convinced the shock of the news had unhinged Ashok.

Ashok was referred to a psychiatrist. Ever since the first test, Ashok had been
trying to be his own counsellor.

‘So what if I have HIV? I have to accept it. Do I have an option not to?’ he
mused. The first step towards living again is acceptance. Life has to move on.

As Ashok lay on his hospital bed, every detail of the last few days flashed
through his mind. He was admitted to the INHS Ashwini Hospital at Mumbai for
treatment of a simple infection, herpes zoster. At the time, he thought nothing
of it. Now, he knew. The HIV virus must have entered his body sometime before.
As a result of it, the viral load was high and the infection developed because
of his low immunity.

He thought about the time when he had gone to an officer on board to pass on
some signals he had received as the ship’s radio-operator. He was wearing a
half-sleeved, white shirt. The medical officer who was passing that way happened
to notice some blisters that had appeared on his arm. “Hey, come here,” he had
said. ‘Open your shirt and let me see. What have you got here?” he asked him in
a tone of concern. Ashok hadn’t really bothered about those blisters and was
dismissive. But the medical officer ordered him to immediately go to the Naval
hospital and get some tests done. This was all a routine matter. In the Navy,
they were so particular about everything. He didn’t give the matter another
thought. Little did he know that would be the last of his normal, working days.
The next day he was in hospital.

Initially, no one told him what they were suspecting. He was there for four
weeks and God knows how many blood tests he had to undergo. The male nursing
assistant would just come, roll up his sleeve, look for his vein and plunge in
the needle. So used to this had he grown that just thinking about it set off a
throbbing sensation in his arm. He always seemed so stern and the starched
uniform only emphasized his stiffness. How could Ashok think of asking him
anything about what was happening? The entire set-up was so intimidating.

He recalled how he had checked with all the sailors when he saw the name of a
blood test written on the slip attached to his bed: Elisa for HIV. Of course, no
one thought anything of it at that time. But he did remember that one of the
sailors remarked, “This is the AIDS test,” and his comment had drawn a puzzled
look from the rest. ‘AIDS, why AIDS?’ he sat there, feeling a little stunned.
‘What has that got to do with me? I don’t have any STDs.’

He was then told there was some problem with his blood; therefore, he had to be
sent to the Command Hospital, Pune, to get a Western Blot test done. There were
three others who had come from the Army and Navy units from various parts of the
country. ‘We were told at that time that all tests, like the TLC, DLC, and chest
X-Ray, would be done. Samples were collected and everyone was taken to National
Institute of Virology for another test. We had to wait four to five days for the
final results.

In those five days, Ashok started preparing himself for the worst. Even if the
verdict is AIDS, so what?” he would repeat to himself several times a day.
Still, he was so confused: not that he had not heard about this virus, it’s just
that no one made him realize, that it could happen to him or to anybody else
like him. He had believed it happened to only those women the prostitutes and
men who visit them. May be, he thought, maybe he did not have HIV. After all, he
had healthy girl friends. How could he have contracted the virus?

Those five days were also a preparation for the discrimination that lay ahead.
He was kept in an isolation ward, meant just for AIDS patients. There were five
others with him. No one would come and visit them. All that they did was play
cards to amuse themselves and pass time. The television was kept in a common
lounge. Several patients would come and watch television there. But all those in
the isolation ward preferred to keep a distance.

What if someone checked them? What if someone was rude to them?

They did not venture to cross the boundaries set for them by the hospital. They
did not even attempt going through a general passage. If they had to go out,
they would take a longer route.

Most of those in the isolation ward were suffering from depression. They were
worried about their families. Ashok too had similar worries.

But he would always tell them, “There is no point in opening the umbrella before
it starts raining.”

Ashok’s mind went back to the doctor’s advice, ‘Don’t get married. And never
have sex again.’ ‘How could the doctor think such advice would work?’ he
wondered. People living with HIV needed to be educated on how to have safe sex.
They had to be informed about the need to protect others. People don’t stop
having sex after they have tested HIV positive, he thought, drifting off to
sleep.

Ashok was given a ‘No Abnormalities Detected’ (NAD) certificate by the
psychiatrist and discharged.

On the way back, he was rehearsing how he would tell his friends about it.
Little did he know that the hospital had already sent a letter to his commanding
officer, who had then summoned a meeting of the division and announced. ‘One
sailor tested positive’ No guesses were required. Everyone knew.

Welcome aboard: to a new world of stigma and shame.

Glossary Glee: delight; joy bob: to move up and down quickly (note the doubling
of consonant in bobbing’) oblivion: being forgotten or disregarded desolate: sad
due to loss of hope brood: to think anxiously and sadly. inept: incompetent,
ineffective HIV: Human Immunodeficiency Virus. Rough up: to threaten; to attack
Intently: showing keen interest Fritter: to waste Contemptuous: showing no
respect at all Mince words: to speak indirectly or vaguely
