Unit: 3 Humanities V/S Science S. Radhakrishnan

Introduction

Dr Sarvepally Radhakrishnan (1888-1975) was India's Vice President (from 1952
to 1962) and President (from 1962 to 1967). He was also a great thinker, teacher
and public intellectual. His interest was in Philosophy and Religion. He was
elected to Oxford's most prestigious Spalding Professorship in Eastern Religions
and Ethics. India observes September 5, the day on which Radhakrishnan was born
as Teacher's Day since 1962.

Sarvepalli Radhakrishnanayya was born in a Telugu Hindu family to Sarvepalli
Veeraswami and Sithamma. He was the fourth son of his parents who lived in
Tiruttani of North Arcot district in the erstwhile Madras Presidency (now in
Tiruvallur district of Tamil Nadu). His family hails from Sarvepalli village in
Nellore district of Andhra Pradesh. His early years were spent in Thiruttani and
Tirupati. His father was a subordinate revenue official in the service of a
local Zamindar (local landlord). His primary education was at K. V. High School
at Thiruttani. In 1896 he moved to the Hermansburg Evangelical Lutheran Mission
School in Tirupati and Government High Secondary School, Walajapet.

He joined Voorhees College in Vellore for his high school education. After his
F.A. (First of Arts) class, he joined the Madras Christian College (affiliated
to the University of Madras) at the age of 16. He graduated from there in 1907,
and also finished his master's degree from the same college. Despite having a
strong interest in mathematics, Radhakrishnan had to study philosophy due to his
family's financial limitations.

Radhakrishnan was married to Sivakamu, a distant cousin, at the age of 14, when
she was aged 10. As per tradition the marriage was arranged by the family. The
couple had five daughters named Padmavati, Rukmini, Sushila, Sundari and
Shakuntala. They also had a son named Sarvepalli Gopal who had a notable career
as a historian.

In fact, his pride as a Hindu, roused by eloquence of Swami Vivekananda
gradually led him to his critical study of Indian philosophy and religion and he
immersed completely for a lifelong defense of Hinduism against “uninformed
Western criticism.”

His important works include Indian Philosophy, The Hindu View of Life, Eastern
Religions and Western Thought, and The Bhagavadgītā, The Philosophy of
Rabindranath Tagore, Indian Religious Thought, Religion, Science and Culture,
Kalki, or the Future of Civilization, Gautama the Buddha and Religion and
Society.

Dr. Radhakrishnan is known for his contributions in the field of education,
philosophy, and public service. He is best known for his advocacy for education,
his philosophical interpretations of Hinduism, and his role as India's second
President.

Dr. S. Radhakrishnan received various awards including the Bharat Ratna award
(from President Rajendra Prasad in 1954), Knight Bachelor (1931), Order of the
Aztec Eagle, Collar (1954), Pour le Mérite for Sciences and Arts (1954), and
Order of Merit, Honorary Member (1963).

The present essay highlights the need to link science and humanities, the role
of universities in nation building and the aim and responsibility of the
individual in nation building. Dr. Radhakrishnan argues that both humanities and
science are important for national development. He adds scientific and
technological education is essential and it must be complemented by humanistic
studies. Science without moral values is unacceptable. Dr. Radhakrishnan also
emphasizes that we should seek truth through both science and religion, as truth
is indivisible regardless of the approach. The ultimate goal of education should
be to help students grow in wisdom and attain self-awareness with a human heart.

Here in this essay he mentions poverty, illness, and ignorance are the primary
barriers to national progress. He understands that overcoming obstacles will
benefit development. He explains without humanistic studies, technological
education will be flawed, unequal, and lacking. Apparently he adds producing men
who are at the same time seers and technicians is not an easy task. We must have
people who are able to develop their imagination and at the same time develop
their scientific skill.

Knowledge and power are two aspects of science which should be spread among
people. It cultivates an attitude that is open-minded, tolerant, free from
prejudice, and receptive to new ideas. Since the humanities teach us about our
nature and how to meditate more deeply on life, they are equally vital. He
understood the significance of education and advocates national development and
individual development would be possible with that. He also believes by
providing proper education, both in quality and quantity, will help to transform
societies and achieve greatness. Humanistic studies help to understand human
nature, ideals, and aspirations, while science and technology provide knowledge
and skills. Technological education is attractive, but it should be complemented
with humanistic studies for a well-rounded education. Science helps us to
develop critical thinking, tolerance, and open-mindedness, whereas by studying
humanities individuals will develop compassion, democratic spirit, and a sense
of responsibility. And he opined humanities and science are complementary to
each other, and both are necessary for a complete education. In a way education
should focus on producing individuals with compassion, democratic spirit, and
sense of responsibility along with scientific spirit.

Text

The three obstacles which stand in the way of national development are
ignorance, disease and poverty. Of these, the major obstacle is ignorance. If we
are able to remove ignorance from men's minds, their poverty also will diminish,
their disease also will be eliminated. That is very essential.

We have been trying to achieve through our Five-Year Plans a kind of economic
development, which will lead to the spread of education, the removal of
illiteracy, the lowering of the incidence of disease and the elimination as much
as possible of poverty.

We have men and women energetic and eager to do their best, and we have vast
natural resources also. In spite of all these things, what is it that prevents
us from achieving something great and glorious here? I say that it is the lack
of proper education, in quality as well as in quantity. When we look at the
country and the vast problems which it is facing, it is the educated men- men
who have competence and skill, who have a sense of direction, who have a social
purpose - it is such people who will be able to transform our societies. If we
are to achieve that, we have to tackle our educational problems more seriously
than we have done hitherto. This must be regarded as the highest priority in any
kind of social and economic reconstruction in our country.

Technological education

People nowadays are greatly attracted by technological education and naturally,
too. But we should also remember that technological education without the
complement of humanistic studies will be imperfect, lopsided and deficient. It
is possible for us, by the control we have obtained over the forces of nature,
to bring about paradise on earth. It is equally possible for us, by pressing a
button, to destroy continents. If the choice is to be made wisely, we must be
cultivated in the arts of civilized life. Humanistic training and technological
study must be regarded as complementary to each other. They should not be
regarded as divorced or as separated from each other.

The industrial growth of our country requires a large number of scientists,
technicians and engineers. The rush in our universities for courses in science
and technology is natural. Men trained in these practical courses help to
increase productivity- agricultural and industrial. They also hope to find
employment easily. To help the students to earn a living is one of the functions
of education.

I do not believe that scientific and technological studies are devoid of moral
values. Science is both knowledge and power. It has interest as well as utility.
It is illuminating as well as fruitful. It demands disciplined devotion to the
pursuit of truth. It develops in its votaries an attitude of tolerance,
open-mindedness, freedom from prejudice and hospitality to new ideas. Science
reveals to us the inexhaustible richness of the world, its unexpectedness, and
its wonder.

Nevertheless, these qualities are developed by science incidentally and not
immediately. It does not directly deal with the non-intellectual aspects of
human nature. Economic man who produces and consumes, the intellectual man, the
scientific man is not the whole man. The disproportionate emphasis on science
and technology has been causing concern to thinking men all over the world. The
great crimes against civilization are committed not by the primitive and the
uneducated but by the highly educated and the so-called civilized.

Humanities

We come to the universities to be equipped with the knowledge and the skill by
which we will be able to help the building up of our country. Are we doing it?
Are the universities providing the right material for the nation-building
operation? Are they giving them the knowledge and the skill which are essential
for any kind of process? You come here to study sciences, to study humanities,
to study theology also, which is not an unimportant science. Science itself is
necessary because the wonders of science have transformed this world.

It is wrong to think, as once upon a time Blake said, “the tree of life is
sustained by art, the tree of death by science.” It is a misleading conception;
science may be abused but that is not the fault of science; that is the fault of
man. It is, therefore, essential for us to provide our students with the best
that is possible in sciences and technology. It is these things that help us to
provide the necessities for our people.

Humanities again are important because they tell us about our own nature; how we
have to grow from day to day. What the impulses are, what the ideals and
aspirations are, these are the things that we have to learn from the humanities.
But whether it is sciences or humanities, whether they are natural sciences or
social sciences, they touch only the periphery of the reality; they touch only
the outside, the expression, the multiplicity of manifestations. But what the
central being is, you have to learn also if a student is to consider himself to
be really educated. Mere sciences, natural or social, are not enough.

The function of the universities is not merely to send out technically skilled
and professionally competent men, but it is their duty to produce in them the
quality of compassion, the quality which enables the individuals to treat one
another in a truly democratic spirit. Our religions have proclaimed from the
very beginning that each human individual is to be regarded as a spark of the
Divine. Tat tvam asi, that art thou, is the teaching of the Upanisads.

National education does not mean that subjects like physics and chemistry,
engineering and technology, change with the boundaries of nations. It means that
there is a national heritage, a tradition of values into which the students
should be initiated. India is not a geographical abstraction but a living
spirit. The outlook associated with the country has been a spiritual one, that
there are higher laws of the universe than those studied by sciences and
technology, that the world is more than what we see, feel, touch and measure.
Two principal features of the modern world are that we are members one of
another, that there are values which will be utilized by the mechanical devices
and contrivances we have brought about. It is necessary for us to know, whatever
may be the nature of science, it is the spirit of man that is expressing itself
there. Every human individual must look up to himself not as living on the outer
surface of things. There is a living depth in him. There is a centre there which
persists, which abides, whatever may be the changes.

There is some spiritual inadequacy, bordering on illiteracy, among the graduates
of our country. They go through their routine, they pass their examinations, and
yet do not seem to know what the first principles of Indian culture are!

If we live today, it is not because of our great industrial progress or
mechanical efficiency or our atom bombs and things like that. We live today
because there are still people who illustrate for the commonalty the path of
spirituality and their behaviour is something which is divinely ordained. It is
such people who represent the true culture of our country, adhyatma vidya; of
all sciences, the greatest science is the knowledge of your own self.

As the Bhagavadgita has it, we should aim at wisdom as well as knowledge, jnanam
vijnana sahitam. At a time when we are obsessed with technical achievement
rather than with absolute values, with practical work rather than with a full
life, it is good to realize that technology is for man and not man for
technology. The material things of the world are to be used for expanding man's
knowledge and enriching the treasures of the spirit. It is not enough to feed
the human animal or train the human mind. We must also attend to the needs of
the human spirit. We must learn to live from a new basis, discover the reserves
of spirituality, the sense of the sacred found in all religions.

Search for truth

There is, however, no incompatibility between the findings of science and the
doctrines of religion. The search of truth is their common goal though they have
different ways of approach to it. Since God is Truth, satya svarupa, the quest
of Truth is the quest of God. Man who makes the machine is greater than the
machine. He who splits the atom is greater than the atom. Science does not
suggest the omnipotence of matter. It suggests the supremacy of the spirit of
man. The spirit which moves in the minds of the men, which inspires and guides
them in this quest is divine. The word ‘Brahman’ connotes both the truth which
is sought and the spirit in us which seeks it. A scientific view of the world
reveals to us a central mystery which is not disclosed to scientific
observation. Our attitude to it should be one of piety, humility and adoration.
We must acknowledge that truth belongs to God and ideas belong to men. The
poison of intolerance is inconsistent with the mystery of God. Too much blood
has been unnecessarily and unjustly shed in the name of religious doctrine. The
different religions are great spiritual achievements of man and we should take
pride not in one special production of mankind but in all, for all are
fellow-pilgrims treading their way to the truth in every great faith. Tirukkural
is claimed by the followers of Jainism, Buddhism and Hinduism and teaches a
universal humanism. True religion requires us to extend our sympathy even to
those who do not belong to our group. Religious pride may make us hold that true
religion is our own, that ‘we are the people, and wisdom shall die with us’.

It is necessary that if we want to attack the problems which our country faces -
poverty, malnutrition, disease, defective water supply, people dying like flies
in some parts of the country these are all things which must make us feel
ashamed of ourselves - it is necessary for us to care for the poor. Attention to
the poor is the supreme test by which any government is judged. If we are to be
judged to be a civilized society, our first interest must be what we are doing
for the thousands of people who are suffering from undreamt of evils-who are the
victims, so to say, of all sorts of epidemics and who died like flies on the
pavements of our country or in rural areas. If we want to tackle these problems
it is essential for us to develop science and technology. We must develop these
things, we must adopt a scientific outlook. Everyone of us must be endowed with
a scientific spirit; obscurantism, superstition and such other things which have
weighed us down for centuries must be removed and human beings must feel that
they are rational human beings with dignity, with a sense of responsibility,
responsibility not merely for what they do but for the poor who are entrusted to
their care.

Again and again remarks were made, a special lecture was delivered at Cambridge,
saying that a scientific culture and an academic or literary culture are two
different things and one has little to do with the other. We produce either
seers or technicians; we produce men of intuition, of imagination, or we produce
men with mechanical skill with practical ability, but we do not produce men who
are at the same time seers and technicians, people who are able to develop their
imagination and at the same time develop their scientific skill. This whole
concept of our cultures being divided, of their being two, is something which
is, to my mind, unfounded. Truth is indivisible. Whether it is historic truth,
literary truth, or scientific truth, the approaches may be different, but
ultimately what we do is exactly the same. It is the imagination that is roused
in us by the study of literature, it is imagination again that makes the
scientist go forward; his hypothesis makes him remould the environment by which
he is presented and makes him bring out the deepest secrets of nature. It is the
spirit in man that sits in judgment on the facts of nature, which enables the
human being to reshape the environment. We should reshape not merely our outer
environment but our inner environment also, our inward forces, the internal
power we have, even that has to be remoulded.

Knowledge and wisdom

Most of us think that we are scientists because we press a button, the light
comes up; we press another button, the telephone rings; we press a third button,
we get the motor-car outside. But we do not know how these things function, what
is the knowledge which is enshrined in these instruments? We know only how to
press a button and get something done. That is, we live on the surface of human
life- robots, mechanics, technicians. We do not know what the depths of these
things indicate and stand for. If we know that, we will never say that science
is a different discipline and not human discipline, and the other things,
literature, history, etc., make a different kind of man. It is not so. We must
study science not from the surface but from its very depth. We must try to
understand how all these things happen, how the human being has been able to
penetrate into these things and how it has brought about a new transformed
world. It is not necessary for us to be technologically or mechanically uniform.
That does not follow. If we have the human spirit cultivated, we will not become
mere mechanical robots. The very transformation that science has brought about
will make you raise the question of the meaning of existence. That is part of
the quest for knowledge. You want to know why knowledge is what it is, what is
the knowledge which science contributes, what is the relation to the knowledge
which other branches of discipline give us.

There is a general criticism levelled against us that where our knowledge of
nature is increasing our wisdom is diminishing. The spectacular achievements of
science are very impressive and they have got such great power in their control
that they can devastate the world. If there are people who contemplate the
results of nuclear developments they will feel, what is it that has happened to
man, why is it that he has increased in worldly power, has so much extended his
body through his control over radio, television and other machines, and yet his
soul seems to be stagnant? It is not growing correspondingly. There is
disproportion between the growth of wisdom and the increase of knowledge. It is
that disparity that has impressed many people. Let us try to extend our
understanding of the nature of things; let us have certain education should
shape a whole man, not a partially developed ‘consumer’ or ‘technician’.
Undoubtedly, we need science and technology to improve the living conditions of
our people. But it is from the humanities that we acquire our sense of values
and social obligations.

The young men and women coming out of universities should be experts in science
and technology, at the same time, they should also be committed to serve the
suffering millions. It is mainly from the humanities that we acquire the
required commitment. While emphasizing the positive role of science in the
development of civilization, we should not be blind to its limitations. It does
not give us complete knowledge of reality. In fact it reveals a central mystery
which cannot be dissected in a laboratory or expressed in language.

Science and religion need not be counterposed because both have a common goal:
the quest for truth. Knowledge is not confined within national boundaries or
religious sects. Therefore we should practice religious tolerance and undertake
international collective research projects for extending the range of knowledge.

The study of humanities is bound to clarify our concept of life's meaning. We
should realize that truth is indivisible, whatever may be the discipline we
specialize in.

Science without humanities in our education, and knowledge without wisdom in our
life, can be disastrous. Hence, we should draw inspiration from Indian cultural
values and cultivate wisdom by mastering the sciences.
