Based on the images provided, here is the extracted text for the story "Karma"
in Unit 6, starting from the introduction and ending just before the activities
section.

His short story “Karma”, published in 1989 in The Collected Stories, is one of
his most celebrated works, showcasing his ability to blend humor with biting
social critique. Karma is a satirical tale that examines themes of identity,
colonial mentality, and irony. The story revolves around Sir Mohan Lal, an
English-educated Indian obsessed with Western manners and culture, who looks
down upon his own heritage and countrymen. In contrast, his wife, Lady Lal,
embodies traditional Indian values and simplicity. The narrative culminates in a
striking twist of irony when Sir Mohan’s blind admiration for Britishness leads
to his humiliation at the hands of the very Englishmen he idolizes. Through
this, Singh powerfully critiques the cultural pretensions of the colonial
mindset and underscores the importance of self-respect and authenticity.

Text

Sir Mohan Lal looked at himself in the mirror of a first class waiting room at
the railway station. The mirror was obviously made in India. The red oxide at
its back had come off at several places and long lines of translucent glass cut
across its surface. Sir Mohan smiled at the mirror with an air of pity and
patronage.

‘You are so very much like everything else in this country, inefficient, dirty,
indifferent,’ he murmured.

The mirror smiled back at Sir Mohan.

‘You are a bit of all right, old chap,’ it said. ‘Distinguished, efficient -
even handsome. That neatly-trimmed moustache - the suit from Savile Row with the
carnation in the buttonhole - the aroma of eau de cologne, talcum powder and
scented soap all about you ! Yes, old fellow, you are a bit of all right.’

Sir Mohan threw out his chest, smoothed his Balliol for the umpteenth time and
waved a goodbye to the mirror.

He glanced at his watch. There was still time for a quick one.

‘Koi Hai!’

A bearer in white livery appeared through a wire gauze door.

‘Ek Chota,’ ordered Sir Mohan, and sank into a large cane chair to drink and
ruminate.

Outside the waiting room, Sir Mohan Lal’s luggage lay piled along the wall. On a
small grey steel trunk, Lachmi, Lady Mohan Lal, sat chewing a betel leaf and
fanning herself with a newspaper. She was short and fat and in her middle
forties.

She wore a dirty white sari with a red border. On one side of her nose glistened
a diamond nose-ring, and she had several gold bangles on her arms. She had been
talking to the bearer until Sir Mohan had summoned him inside. As soon as he had
gone, she hailed a passing railway coolie.

‘Where does the zenana stop?’

‘Right at the end of the platform.’

The coolie flattened his turban to make a cushion, hoisted the steel trunk on
his head, and moved down the platform. Lady Lal picked up her brass tiffin
carrier and ambled along behind him. On the way she stopped by a hawker’s stall
to replenish her silver betel leaf case, and then joined the coolie. She sat
down on her steel trunk (which the coolie had put down) and started talking to
him.

“Are the trains very crowded on these lines ?”

“These days all trains are crowded, but you’ll find room in the zenana.”

‘Then I might as well get over the bother of eating’

Lady Lal opened the brass carrier and took out a bundle of cramped chapatties
and some mango pickle. While she ate, the coolie sat opposite her on his
haunches drawing lines in the gravel with his finger.

‘Are you travelling alone, sister ?’

‘No, I am with my master, brother. He is in the waiting room. He travels first
class. He is a vizier and a barrister - and I am only a native woman. I can’t
understand English and don’t know their ways, so I keep to my zenana inter
class.’

Lachmi chatted away merrily. She was fond of a little gossip and had no one to
talk to at home. Her husband never had any time to spare for her. She lived in
the upper storey of the house and he was on the ground floor. He did not like
her poor illiterate relatives hanging around his bungalow, so they never came.
He came up to her once in a while at night and stayed for a few minutes. He just
ordered her about in anglicised Hindustani, and she obeyed passively. These
nocturnal visits had, however, borne no fruit.

The signal came down and the clanging of the bell announced the approaching
train. Lady Lal hurriedly finished off her meal. She got up, still licking the
stone of the pickled mango. She emitted a long, loud belch as she went to the
public tap to rinse her mouth and wash her hands. After washing she dried her
mouth and hands with the loose end of her sari, and walked back to her steel
trunk, belching and thanking the Gods for the favour of a filling meal.

The train steamed in. Lachmi found herself facing an almost empty inter-class
zenana compartment next to the guard’s van, at the tail end of the train. The
rest of the was packed. She heaved her squat, bulky frame through the door and
found a seat by the window. She bribed a two-anna bit from a knot in her sari
and tossed it to the coolie. She then opened her betel case and prepared herself
two betel leaves charged with a red and white paste, minced betelnuts and
cardamoms. These she stuffed into her mouth till her cheeks bulged on both
sides. Then she rested her chin on her hands and sat gazing idly at the jostling
crowd on the platform.

The arrival of the train did not disturb Sir Mohan Lal’s sangfroid. He continued
to sip his scotch and ordered the bearer to tell him when he had moved the
luggage to the first class compartment. Excitement, bustle and hurry were
exhibitions of bad breeding, and Sir Mohan was eminently well-bred. He wanted
everything ‘tickety-boo’ and orderly. In his five years abroad, Sir Mohan had
acquired the manners and attitudes of the upper classes. He rarely spoke
Hindustani. When he did, it was like an Englishman’s - only the very necessary
words and properly anglicised. But he fancied his English, finished and refined
at no less a place than the University of Oxford. He was fond of conversation,
and like a cultured Englishman, he could talk on almost any subject - books,
politics, people. How frequently had he heard English people say that he spoke
like an Englishman !

Sir Mohan wondered if he would be travelling alone. It was a Cantonment and some
English officers might be on the train. His heart warmed at the prospect of an
impressive conversation. He never showed any sign of eagerness to talk to the
English as most Indians did. Nor was he loud, aggressive and opinionated like
them. He went about his business with an expressionless matter-of-factness. He
would retire to his corner by the window and get out a copy of The Times. He
would fold it in a way in which the name of the paper was visible to others
while he did the crossword puzzle. The Times always attract attention. Someone
would like to borrow it when he put it aside with a gesture signifying ‘I’ve
finished with it’. Perhaps someone would recognize his Balliol tie which he
always wore while travelling. That would open a vista leading to a fairy-land of
Oxford colleges, masters, dons, tutors, boat-races and rugger matches. If both
The Times and the tie failed, Sir Mohan would ‘Koi Hai’ his bearer to get the
Scotch out. Whiskey never failed with Englishmen. Then followed Sir Mohan’s
handsome gold cigarette case filled with English cigarettes. English cigarettes
in India ? How on earth did he get them ? Sure he didn’t mind ? And Sir Mohan’s
understanding smile of course he didn’t. But could he use the Englishman as a
medium to commune with his dear old England ? Those five years of grey bags and
gowns, of sports blazers and mixed doubles, of dinners at the inns of Court and
nights with Piccadilly prostitutes. Five years of a crowded glorious life. Worth
far more than the forty-five in India with his dirty, vulgar countrymen, with
sordid details of the road to success, of nocturnal visits to the upper storey
and all-too-brief sexual acts with obese old Lachmi, smelling of sweat and raw
onions.

Sir Mohan’s thoughts were disturbed by the bearer announcing the installation of
the Sahib’s luggage in a first class coupe next to the engine. Sir Mohan walked
to his coupe with a studied gait. He was dismayed. The compartment was empty.
With a sigh he sat down in a corner and opened the copy of ‘The Times’, he had
read several times before.

Sir Mohan looked out of the window down the crowded platform. His face lit up as
he saw two English soldiers trudging along, looking in all the compartments for
room. They had their haversacks slung behind their backs and walked unsteadily.
Sir Mohan decided to them, even though they were entitled to travel in first and
second class. He would speak to the guard.

One of the soldiers came up to the last compartment and stuck his face through
the window. He surveyed the compartment and noticed the unoccupied berth.

‘Ere, Bill, he shouted, ‘one ere.’

His companion came up, also looked in, and looked at Sir Mohan.

‘Get the nigger out,’ he muttered to his companion.

They opened the door, and turned to the half-smiling, protesting Sir Mohan.

‘Reserved!’ yelled Bill.

‘Janta - Reserved. Army - Fauj,’ exclaimed Jim, pointing to his khaki shirt.

‘Ek Dum jao - get out!’

‘I say, I say, surely,’ protested Sir Mohan in his Oxford accent. The soldiers
paused. It almost sounded like English, but they knew better than to trust their
inebriated ears. The engine whistled and the guard waved his green flag.

They picked up Sir Mohan’s suitcase and flung it onto the platform. Then
followed his thermos flask, briefcase, bedding and The Times. Sir Mohan was
livid with rage.

‘Preposterous, preposterous,’ he shouted, hoarse with anger.

‘I’ll have you arrested - guard, guard!’

Bill and Jim paused again. It did sound like English, but it was too much of the
King’s for them.

‘Keep yer ruddy mouth shut!’ And Jim struck Sir Mohan flat on the face.

The engine gave another short whistle and the train began to move. The soldier's
caught Sir Mohan by the arm and flung him out of the train. He reeled backwards,
tripped on his bedding, and landed on the suitcase.

‘Toodle-oo!’

Sir Mohan’s feet were glued to the earth and he lost his speech. He stared at
the lighted windows of the train going past him in quickening tempo. The
tail-end of the train appeared with a red light and the guard standing in the
open doorway with the flags in his hands.

In the inter-class zenana compartment was Lachmi, fair and fat, on whose nose
the diamond nose-ring glistened against the station lights. Her mouth was
bloated with betel saliva which she had been storing up to spit as soon as the
train had cleared the station. As the train sped past the lighted part of the
platform, Lady Lal spat and sent a jet of red dribble flying aeross like a dart.

Glossary

Savile Row : a street in London renowned for its bespoke tailoring for men
Zenana : reserved for women replenish : fill up again Vizier : high official
Sangfroid : composure or coolness Tickety-boo : in good order or fine Rugger : a
game played by two teams using an oval ball Sordid : dirty or dishonourable act
Gait : a person’s manner of walking. Preposterous : absurd or ridiculous Dart :
missile, arrow
