Note: The images provided are for Unit 13, not chapter twelve. I have extracted
the full text for Unit 13 as requested.

Unit 13 Factories are Eye Sores Baldoon Dingra

Introduction Prior to independence, one of India’s most prominent poets was
Baldoon Dingra. He lived in Paris from 1940s until 1960s while working as an
Indian representative to UNESCO. He was a writer, poet, and art historian. In
addition to being a genuine spiritual seeker, he was an educator. His poetry has
an irresistible cadence brimming with promise and hope. As a long-time resident
of Paris, Mr. Dhingra had cultivated a lyrical style that was reminiscent of
western poets. His poetry dealt mainly with neutral topics, appreciating and
adoring nature with compassion and empathy. Comes Ever the Dawn, Beauty’s
Sanctuary, and Symphony of Love are his major collections of poems.

The poem highlights the complexities of industrial development and the
subsequent predicament of nature. The poet tries to present himself as a nature
lover who bemoans the destruction of nature with the increase of factories. He
also suggests the seamy side of the life of the workers in the industrial areas
where air pollution is intense. Their monotonous toil in the unpleasant
atmosphere of the factory is highlighted in the poem. The poet wonders how the
ugliness of the smoke belching factories would have made on painters like Claude
Monnet or how it would have inspired him to make a beautiful painting of the
landscape. The poet thus concludes the poem by pointing out how beauty can be
created out of ugliness.

About the Poem The poem reveals the ambivalent attitude of the poet towards
nature and development. The poet at once agrees and disagrees with those
conscious of the beauty of the landscape. The poet’s conflicted feelings on
nature and progress are made clear in the poem. The poet simultaneously concurs
and disagrees with people who appreciate the landscape’s beauty. By using the
common environmentalist adage, “factories are eyesores,” it seems that he is
attempting to project an image of himself as a nature lover. Because the
vegetation is blackened by the black smoke coming from the chimneys, they are
eye sores.

He questions how Claude Monnet, a painter, would have been affected by the filth
of the smoke-belching industries or how they would have motivated him to create
a stunning landscape painting. Because ugliness may be transformed into a
beautiful art, the claim that “factories are eyesores” really loses credibility.
The poem also comments on the negative consequences of unchecked
industrialization, highlighting the need for more sustainable practices through
vivid imagery. It might be interpreted as a reflection on the subjective nature
of beauty and ugliness, encouraging readers to consider their own perceptions
and biases based on their own experiences.

Text The factories, eyesores as you say, Make iron lines against the sky.
Standing to eastward, gaunt and high They belch black smoke by night and day,
Blots on the landscape, as you say.

Weary and desperate with toil, Man labours in that acrid space, Time and again
he turns his face Away from grimy smoke and soil To pray he shall have done with
toil.

But yet, when mountain tops flush bright With sun-down scintillating gleam, Some
tremulously slender base Touches a chimney shaft with light. And things of
ugliness grow bright.

With smoke about them, sullen, slow, Half-hidden in mist, I sometimes think How
Monnet had limned them on the brink Of the world’s edge, when fires burn low,
And smoke hung around them sullen, slow.

Now are they eyesores, as you say, At noontide with those smoking tops: Man
works beneath, until he drops Out of the world of wheels one day Factories are
eyesores, as you say.
