14 Framing Perspectives................................................... for Sciences

to think critically about complex social issues and develop a nuanced understanding of the world.

The first module commences with the unit titled Integrating Human Rights, Leave No One Behind, and Gender Equality into UN Cooperation Frameworks- United Nations Sustainable Development Group advocates importance of equality above and beyond all category of marginalisation. It enhances the argument by supporting the need for inclusivity in all fields.

The second unit On the Rule of the Road is a close examination of the concept of what liberty is and what anarchy on the peripheral level is. Here A.G. Gardiner addresses the issue of enforcing traffic rules for a safe and sound social life.

The third unit titled as Humanities V/S Science by Dr. Radhakrishnan enumerates the idea that Science without Humanities is just like knowledge without wisdom will be disastrous. He also adds that science and religion have a common goal -the quest for truth.

The fourth unit I Am'a Cat Directed by Kon Ichikawa is a satirical film that critiques Japanese society during the Meiji period. Here the story is narrated by a stray cat who observes and comments on the lives of a human family and their acquaintances. Thus, the learners may develop a deeper understanding of human rights, inclusivity, and social justice. They would analyse the importance of balancing individual freedom with collective responsibility. Learners could explore the relationship between Science and Humanities, recognizing the value of interdisciplinary approaches. They will be able to critically evaluate societal norms and cultural critique through satire.

Unit: 1
Integrating Human Rights, Leave No One Behind, and Gender Equality into UN Cooperation Frameworks- United Nations Sustainable Development Group

Introduction
The United Nations' Department of Economic and Social Affairs envisions sustainable development based on human rights. They have set the 2030 Agenda for this reason. The agenda is a plan of action for people, planet and prosperity with an intention to strengthen universal peace and freedom. On a larger scale this also aims to eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions. In fact, the objective is to free the human race from the tyranny of poverty and to heal and secure our planet. To shift the world onto a sustainable and resilient path there should be bold and transformative steps from the part of UN by unlocking certain principles for the world to follow. To facilitate the mission 2030 UN envisages 17 Sustainable Development Goals and 169 targets. UN aims to ensure prosperous and fulfilling lives for all human beings and also insists the need for economic, social and technological progress in harmony with nature. A revitalised Global Partnership for Sustainable Development is needed for achieving this goal. With improved international peace and strengthened global solidarity those may cater to the needs of the poorest and most vulnerable.

16 Framing Perspectives................................................... for Sciences

The United Nations presents its 2030 agenda with the objective of integrating human rights into sustainable development. Here, the focus should be on the six guiding principles that make the 2030 agenda possible. The UN acknowledges that without women empowerment, no resilient society could exist. The present video produced by UNSDG highlights the importance of human rights that incorporate all people irrespective of gender, nation, race, class and other differences. Focussing on Agenda 2030 UN highlights the need for a developed society based on equity and human rights. UN considers it possible to create a resilient society through gender equality and women empowerment. The video enhances the idea of sustainable development with the incorporation of six major components: human rights-based approach, leave no one behind, gender equality and women's empowerment, resilience, sustainability, and accountability.

Text
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mHHy1gDn4x8
Or scan this QR code

Glossary
UN: The United Nations is an international organization founded in 1945. Currently made up of 193 Member States, the UN and its work are guided by the purposes and principles contained in its founding charter.

HRBA: The human rights-based approach (HRBA) is a conceptual framework for the process of human development that is normatively based on international human rights standards and operationally directed to promoting and protecting human rights.

UDHR: The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is a milestone document in the history of human rights. Drafted by representatives with different legal and cultural backgrounds from all regions of the world, it set out, for the first time, fundamental human rights to be universally protected.

SDG: The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), also known as the Global Goals, were adopted by the United Nations in 2015 as a universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure that by 2030 all people enjoy peace and prosperity.