--- Page 1 ---
Annual Evaluation 2022-2023
Social Science
Answer key
Total Score 40
Class -8
Answer the questions 1 and 2 ,Each carries 1 score
1 Kerala
2 Egyptian civilization
Answer all the questions from 3 to 6 .Each carries 2 score
3 Buddhist teachings and ideologies failed to receive much support from the
later rulers.Buddhism lost its grandeur when it was split into two sects - the
Mahayana and the Hinayana.The revival of vedic religion adversely affected
the progress of Buddhism.
(Any two points )
4 A-Bridge B-Graveyard
5 It is essential to create environmental awareness in people.Must give
scientific environmental education from childhood itself.
Each one of us is bound to obey the existing rules.The side walls around the
houses will be built by bio-fencings with bush plants instead of those with
bricks and cement.The people of Kerala must be provided with the awareness
and skill to go on with the development activities without causing much harm
to the natural environment. By nurturing such a culture we can check natural
calamities from becoming severe disasters.
(Any two points )
6 Promote companionship, Train behavior patterns, Promote coexistence
Promote social values and Ensure cooperation (Any two points )
Answer any 3 the questions from 7 to 10 .Each carries 3 score
7 Appoint the Prime Minister and other ministers. Appoint Chief Justice and
judges of the Supreme Court. Nominate 12 members of Rajya Sabha and 2
members of Lok Sabha. Act as the Supreme Commander of armed forces.
Give assent to bills passed by the parliament. Declare emergency in the
country if needed. Take decision on mercy petitions (Any three points )

--- Page 2 ---
8 A-Kalidasa ,B-Aryabhattiyam,C-Amarasimha
9
(Any three points )
10 The Chairman of the NITI Aayog is the Prime Minister. The governing
council consists of all state Chief Ministers, Lieutenant Governors of union
territories, and a Vice chairman nominated by the Prime Minister. In addition
to full members, there are two part-time members and four ex-officio
members and a chief executive officer . The temporary members are selected
from the leading universities and research institutions. The Prime Minister
deputes four cabinet ministers as ex-officio members. The chief executive
officer is appointed by the Prime Minister
(Any three points )
Answer any 4 the questions from 11 to 15 .Each carries 4 score
11 a Wetlands are natural sinks of surface water. Paddy fields, ponds ,
swampy regions and all low lying regions come under the category of low
lands.
b Lowering of water level in wells. Floods become common in rivers even in
slight rains.
12 Troposphere -Cloud formation
Stratosphere -Ozone layer
Mesosphere -The meteors get burnt out
Thermosphere-Helps in the transmission of radio waves.
13 The rains that lashed Kerala between June 2018 and August 2018 were
much more than the normal.This caused considerable flooding in 13 out of
the 14 districts.The damage and destruction caused by the floods in 2018 can
never be really estimated.It had its devastative effect on all the sectors.

--- Page 3 ---
It took away hundreds of lives.The land, environment as well as the lifeforms
including man were subjected to flood.The agricultural sector was wholly
affected by the floods.
(Any four points )
14
A -Informal social control
B-Family
C-Military
D-Prison
15 The undesirable change in the physical, chemical and biological properties
of water is termed as water pollution.
Water pollution not only affects the availability of freshwater, but leads to the
pollution of land and air as well. The survival of plants and animals are put to
danger.
Questions 16 and 17 carry 5 score each.Answer any one

--- Page 4 ---
16
17 Conservation of wetlands ,Protection of forests ,Terrace farming,
Mulching, Construction of check dams ,Construction of mud walls and
Digging rainwater percolation pits .
(Any five points )
Prepared by Ambily Oommen
HST -Social Science
MDSHSS KOTTAYAM