--- Page 1 ---
Annual Examination March  2018    8th  SS  Answer key Eng Medium
Qn.No.                       Value points 
Score
Total Score
                                      1 To  7  answer  all  questions
1
Adam Smith
1
14
2
Mudrarakshasa
1
3
Flood-- deforestation --- 
decline of agricultural sectors --- 
epidemics
4
Appoint Prime Minister and other ministers --- appoint Chief Justice
and judges of Supreme court  & High court --- nominate 12 
members of Rajya sabha and 2 members of Lok sabha --- act as the 
Supreme Commander of armed forces --- give assent to bills passed 
by the parliament--- declare emergency in the country if needed--- 
take decision on mercy petitions 
1+1
5
Atlas maps  ------Wall maps
1+1
6
Green revolution was made possible through use of high yielding 
seeds, improved irrigation , fertilizers, insecticides and agriculture 
finance at low interest rate.
To increase the milk and milk products.
1+1
7.
Kurinchi    ---------Hunting
Mullai  ------------ Cattle rearing
Marutham --------  Rice cultivation
Neythal   --------  Fishing
1+1+1
+1
                                   8    To   11  answer  any three
8
Brought to the atmosphere by the wind-------
erupted through volcanoes-----
ash formed by burning of meteors
1+1+1
3x3=9
9
The property of rocks that can contain the water is called 
porosity.----
when the  soil and rocks are able to let the water drain it is called 
permeability---The surface of the water rich parts beneath the 
ground is known as water table.
1+1+1
10
Rain water harvesting ----    Roof top rain water harvesting-----
storage of surface run off water  
recycling of water.
1+1+1
11
Affects the availability of fresh water---- 
pollution of land and air----
the survival of plants and animals are put to danger.
1+1+1
                           12    to 15        answer     any   three
12
Agriculture was extended to a large area and handicrafts based on 
agriculture developed---
This led to Varna system which was centred on occupation---
according to  Megasthanes  there existed seven social divisions---
slave or Dasas-- -
joint family system prevailed.
1+1+1
+1

--- Page 2 ---
13
Growth :-- the increase in output of goods and services produced in 
the country.  
Modernisation:--making use of the latest technology & making a 
change in the perception of society .
Self-reliance:- it enables the use of human resource and brings 
economic gain to attain self sufficiency to  avoid foreign 
dependence.
Equity:- All citizens receive basic necessities of life and righteous 
distribution of wealth.
1+1+1
+1
14
Famous poets  lived during Gupta period
Ujjain was an important centre. 'Prashasti' was written by Samudra 
Gupat's  court poet Hari Sena. 
A number of books were written in Sanskrit language. 
Kalidasa, Shuudraka. Vishakhadatta, vaghbhada (kiratharjuneeyam) 
were the famous poets.
1+1+1
+1
3X4=12
15
In every society there are certain commonly accepted standards of 
behaviour.---
Society establishes suitable social institution for the regulation of 
behaviours and socialization of its members.---- 
social control is formally implemented through the systems such as 
police, courts,prison and military---
Society has institutions and systems to control to prevent or punish 
those who do not adhere to social control
1+1+1
+1
16 to 17  answer any    one
16
Atmosphere:- can be divided into different layers.
Troposphere:- This layer extends up-to above 13 km from the 
surface of the earth and lies close to earth. Almost all the weather 
and climatic phenomena such as cloud formation, rain, snow, wind, 
thunder and lightning take place in this layer. The temperature 
decreases at a uniform  rate of 1°C for every 165 meters of altitude. 
The zone of transition above the troposphere is called  tropopause.
Stratosphere:- Extends op to a height of 50 km from the earth and 
lies above the tropopause----In the lower parts of the stratosphere 
there is no change in temperature with altitude. This zone is called 
isothermal zone--- Ozone layer which forms part of this layer 
absorbs the harmful ultra violet rays from the sun and prevent it 
from reaching the earth----Allows the free movement of jet air crafts
through clear atmospheric conditions and absence of air gutters----
The zone of transitions above the stratosphere is called stratopause
Mesosphere:- Extends from about 50 to 80 km altitude from the 
earth.---Temperature decreases with altitude and the lowest 
temperature of the atmosphere is felt at the mesopause  ( -80°C to 
-100°C)--The meteors on reaching the mesosphere gets burned out 
due to friction. 
The zone of transition above the mesosphere is called mesopause.
Thermosphere:- Extends from about 80 to 600km altitude----There 
is considerable increase in temperature with altitude----the lower 
part of the thermosphere is known as ionosphere-----Ionosphere 
helps of transmission of radio waves.
1+2+2
5

--- Page 3 ---
17
The increase in temperature in the atmosphere due to green house 
gases is referred as global warming.
Deforestation, burning of fossils, Industrialization, urbanization--
Obey the rules regarding preventing pollution, encourage the use of 
cycles and public vehicles, avoid the use of fire works and 
explosives, burning plastics, encourage renewable sources of energy,
use bio -fertilizers and pesticides, reuse the industrial waste.
1+2+2
Prepared by 
  JEYANTHY.R
   H S T Social Science
   G M M G H S S
    PALAKKAD
     23-03-2018