=== Unit  2__Towards the Emergence of the National Movement ===

--- PAGE 27 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p027_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p027_01)]
Nobin Madhab
Golok Chunder Basu
Sadhu Churn
Yes, What Nobin said 
is right. We have been 
silent for too long.  
Our ancestors ask us to 
break these chains.  
We can fight together 
for our freedom and for 
our future generations.
Fig. 2.1 l 
Towards the 
Emergence of the 
National Movement
2
Unit
Father, how long will we 
endure this tyranny?  
The neelam landlords 
have made us mere 
slaves on our own land.  
We have to wake up and 
fight for our rights.
My son, our sufferings are great.  
But our unity is greater than that.  
The time has come for us to stand 
together not only as farmers but 
also as a nation.  We are not weak.  
We must show the world that we 
can resist and reclaim our dignity.

--- PAGE 28 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p028_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p028_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p028_02.jpg (fig_ch02_p028_02)]
28
Social Science
Standard
Did you listen to the conversation given above ? This 
is a part of the play Nil Darpan written by Bengali 
literary and social reformer Dinabandhu Mitra.  The 
characters speak against the exploitation of the indigo 
plantation owners, which we discussed in the previous 
chapter.  They highlight the need for Indians to stand 
together against the exploiters.  What can be learned 
from this conversation?
l	 The need to fight against foreign tyranny
l	 Emancipation from economic exploitation
l
Before independence, India was divided into many 
princely states.  Segregation existed in all spheres like 
caste, religion, dress, language and culture.  But in the 
second half of the nineteenth century, beyond all such 
differences, a sense of unity emerged among Indians. 
A strong anti-British feeling was the basis of this sense 
of unity of the Indian people.  This sense of unity is 
called Nationalism.  Let us examine the circumstances 
that led to strengthen Indian nationalism.
Economic Policy
We had discussed earlier the capture of various princely 
states in India by the British and the economic policies 
implemented by them. India had become a colony for 
the collection of raw materials for the British industries 
and also a market for the British products.  Economic 
exploitation was the aim of the British.  The policies 
adopted by them for this led to unemployment and 
poverty in India. As a result, various categories like farmers, 
artisans, small traders and tribal communities started 
fighting against the British. Dadabhai Naoroji, R. C. Dutt, 
and Mahadev Govind Ranade carried out detailed studies 
about the economic exploitation by the British. They were 
the early leaders of the Indian National Movement.
The Grand Old
Man of India
Fig. 2.2 l Dadabhai Naoroji
Poverty and Un-British 
Rule in India is a book 
by Dadabhai Naoroji 
who is known as the 
‘Grand Old Man of 
India’. In this book 
he presented his 
observation that the 
British were draining 
away the wealth of 
India (Drain theory). 
Thus the economic 
consequences of 
British rule became a 
subject of discussion.

--- PAGE 29 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p029_03.jpg (fig_ch02_p029_03)]
29
Towards the Emergence of the 
National Movement
Fig. 2.4 l 
R. C. Dutt
Fig. 2.3 l 
Mahadev Govind Ranade
Western Education
Modern education spread in India at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century. English education was propagated 
by the British to highlight their superiority, to subjugate 
Indians culturally, and mould a section of Indians who would 
be sympathetic to them. But the English educated Indians 
became conscious of democracy, freedom, egalitarianism, 
equal justice, scientific temper and civil rights.
Indians who got acquainted with these new ideas wondered 
how their country came under the British rule. They 
constantly talked about the need to end the British rule. 
English became the common language of exchange of ideas 
for people coming from different parts of the country. 
Western education helped Indians to understand about the 
economic and social weaknesses of the country. This led to 
the emergence of nationalism.
How did western education help in developing 
nationalism among Indians?  
Discuss and prepare notes.
Literature and Newspapers
Literary works and newspapers played an important role 
in spreading nationalism in India. The protest against the 
British had reflections in literature. The sufferings, neglect 
and exploitation faced by the people in different parts of 
the country became themes in literary works.  The works 
of prominent writers of that time like Dinabandhu Mitra, 
Bankim Chandra Chatterjee, Rabindranath Tagore, Vallathol 
Narayana Menon, and Subramania Bharati played an 
important role in inculcating nationalism among the people.
Major national literary figures
Language
l	 Bankim Chandra Chatterjee
l	 Rabindranath Tagore
l	 Bengali 
l	 Lakshminath Bezbaruah 
l	 Assamese
l	 Vishnushastri Chiplunkar
l	 Marathi

--- PAGE 30 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p030_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p030_01)]
30
Social Science
Standard
l	 Subramania Bharati
l	 Tamil
l	 Bharatendu Harishchandra
l	 Premchand
l	 Hindi
l	 Altaf Hussain Hali
l	 Urdu
l	 Vallathol Narayana Menon
l	 Malayalam
Many newspapers in English and regional languages came 
into existence at that time.  The social reformer Raja Ram 
Mohan Roy pioneered journalism in India. The newspapers 
he started were Sambad Kaumudi in Bengali and Mirat ul-
Akbar in Persian. Such newspapers were able to respond and 
criticise the British policies, and patronise a critical mindset 
against exploitation. Listed below are some important 
newspapers which played a decisive role in the development 
of modern ideas and nationalism.
News Paper
Language
Amrita Bazar Patrika
Bengali
The Hindu
English
The Times of India
Mathrubhumi
Malayalam
Al Ameen
The British saw the newspapers as a weapon of propaganda 
against them and took measures to control them.  Important 
among these is the Vernacular Press Act enacted by Lord 
Lytton.  Indian people stood united against such laws.
Prepare a short description on ‘The Role of Press 
in Developing Nationalism.’
Social Reform Movements
Modern education helped to realise the need to eliminate 
false beliefs and superstitions that prevailed in society.  
Fig. 2.7 l Rabindranath Tagore
Fig. 2.5 l Dinabandhu Mitra
Fig. 2.8 l Vallathol Narayana Menon
Fig. 2.9 l Subramania Bharati
Fig. 2.6 l Bankim Chandra Chatterjee

--- PAGE 31 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p031_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p031_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p031_02.jpg (fig_ch02_p031_02)]
31
Towards the Emergence of the 
National Movement
Let us examine the early reformers in India and their 
activities.
Raja Ram Mohan Roy
Raja Ram Mohan Roy initiated social reforms in India. 
Born in Bengal in 1772, he had profound knowledge in 
Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, and Judaism. Roy was a 
multilingual scholar, influenced by the ideals of French 
Revolution.
Major social reforming activities of Raja Ram Mohan 
Roy are listed below.
Fig. 2.10 l Raja Ram Mohan Roy
 He played a crucial role 
in abolishing Sati.
 Started many schools 
to impart modern 
education.
 Started 
a social reform 
movement called 
Brahma Samaj.
 Argued that 
women have the
right to inheritance.
 Stood against idolatry 
and polytheism.
 Fought against  
social evils like child 
marriage and 
polygamy.
Jyotirao Phule
Jyotirao Phule was a social reformer who fought for the 
rights of people who were considered lower caste in 
Maharastra and for the women. He formed an organisation 
named Satyashodhak Samaj for social reformation. This 
organisation made efforts for widow marriage and to 
provide protection to children of widows. He established 
many educational institutions for Women and Dalits.  The 
people of Maharashtra respectfully called him ‘Mahatma.’ 
His life partner Savitribai Phule also accompanied him in 
all his activities. Savitribai also participated in educational 
activities by establishing several schools for girls and night 
schools.
Fig. 2.11 l 
Jyotirao Phule

--- PAGE 32 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p032_02.jpg (fig_ch02_p032_02)]
32
Social Science
Standard
Pandita Ramabai
Pandita Ramabai was a feminine presence in the field of 
social reforms. A native of Karnataka, Ramabai mastered 
languages such as Sanskrit, Marathi and Bengali. Ramabai 
was honoured with the title of ‘Pandita’ by the teachers of 
the University of Calcutta for her Knowledge in Sanskrit 
literature.
Pandita Ramabai fought against child marriage and started 
several schools for the education of widows and girls.  An 
organisation called ‘Arya Mahila Samaj’ was established for 
such activities.  A shelter called ‘Sharada Sadan’ was started 
for the rehabilitation of widows and a project called Mukti 
Mission was started to provide vocational training for 
women. She participated in the conference of the Indian 
National Congress held in Bombay in 1889.
Fig. 2.12 l 
Pandita Ramabai
Prepare a note analysing the activities of Raja Ram Mohan Roy, 
Jyotirao Phule and Pandita Ramabai.
Let us familiarise ourselves with some other important 
social reform movements of India and their founders.
Social reform movements
Founders
Prarthana Samaj
Atmaram Pandurang
Arya Samaj
Swami Dayananda Saraswati
Aligarh Movement
Sir Syed Ahmad Khan
Theosophical Society
Madame Blavatsky, Colonel Olcott
Ramakrishna Mission
Swami Vivekananda
Hitakarini Samaj
Veeresalingam Pantulu
Swabhimana Prasthanam
E. V. Ramasamy Naicker
Sree Narayana Dharma Paripalana Yogam Sree Narayana Guru
Sadhujana Paripalana Sangham
Ayyankali

--- PAGE 33 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p033_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p033_01)]
33
Towards the Emergence of the 
National Movement
Through social reform activities, the self-confidence of 
Indians grew and this led to the growth of nationalism.
Transport and Communication
The British expanded transport and communication facilities 
in India for trade, industry, and military purposes.  They 
started the railways, postal system, and telegraph services. 
They also improved the road transport system to ease the 
movement of goods. These facilities helped people to travel 
to all parts of India, communicate and understand each 
other.  In this way, the idea of nationlism emerged and the 
national movement strengthened. The implementation of a 
unified administrative system, legal system, and currency 
system also created a sense of unity among the people.
Prepare a seminar paper on the topic ‘Factors that contributed to the 
growth of Indian nationalism.’
Indicators
l	 economic policy 
l	 western education	
l	 social reform movements	
l	 transportation and communication	
l	 literature and newspapers
Early political 
movements
Centre of
activity
National leaders who led 
the movements
Indian Association
Calcutta
Surendranath Banerjee,
Ananda Mohan Bose
Madras Mahajan Sabha
Madras
M. Veeraraghavachariar,
G. Subramania Iyer,
Ananda Charlu
Bombay Presidency 
Association
Bombay
Pherozeshah Mehta, 
K. T. Telang,
Badruddin Tyabji
Formation of Political Organisations
The opinion that organisations should be formed to unite the people against the 
British emerged from different parts of India. As a result, new political organisations 
were formed in the second half of the nineteenth century. Some of them are given 
below.

--- PAGE 34 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p034_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p034_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p034_02.jpg (fig_ch02_p034_02)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p034_03.jpg (fig_ch02_p034_03)]
34
Social Science
Standard
Discuss and list the limitations of early political 
movements.
What have you learned regarding the formation of the Indian National 
Congress?
l	 Indian National Congress was formed in 1885.
l
l
On December 28, 1885, at 12 noon, a meeting was held in a spacious 
room at the Gokuldas Tejpal Sanskrit College, Bombay. Seventy-two 
persons had assembled there. They had worked as representatives of 
some important organisations in different regions of India. They were 
different personalities in terms of language, religion and recognition 
in society... One of the organisers was an Englishman, Allan Octavian 
Hume. W. C. Banerjee, a lawyer, presided over the meeting that day.
Courtesy: KSICL, History of National Freedom Struggle for Children
Fig. 2.13 l The participants of the first Indian National Congress
These organisations were not an all India by nature. Their 
activities were confined to certain provinces and territories. 
Such organisations led by the rich and the middle class 
failed to create awareness among the masses politically.  In 
this context, the need to form an all-India organisation was 
strengthened.
Formation of All India Organisation
The historical conference that launched the Indian National 
Congress is described above.

--- PAGE 35 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p035_03.jpg (fig_ch02_p035_03)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p035_05.jpg (fig_ch02_p035_05)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p035_06.jpg (fig_ch02_p035_06)]
35
Towards the Emergence of the 
National Movement
Fig. 2.14 l 
Allan Octavian Hume
Fig. 2.15 l 
W. C. Banerjee
The first Malayali 
who became the 
President of the 
Indian National 
Congress. He 
presided over 
the Amaravathi 
Congress in 1897.
Sir. C 
Sankaran 
Nair
Fig. 2.16 l 
“Bengal united is a power, Bengal divided 
will put in different ways. This is the feeling 
of congress leaders. This is one of the merits 
of the scheme of the partition of Bengal. One 
of the main aims is to split up and thereby 
weaken a solid body of opponents to our rule.”
H.H. Risley
Courtesy: KSICL, History of National Freedom 
Struggle for Children
The early objectives of the Indian National 
Congress helped to develop a sense of 
nationalism in India.  Discuss.
The main objective of this conference was to form a general 
opinion among the social and political activists from different 
regions. The declared objectives of the Indian National 
Congress are given below.
l	 To foster friendly relation among political activists in 
different parts of India.
l	 To foster and strengthen a sense of national unity 
irrespective of caste, religion and province.
l	 Formulate and give shape to common needs and present 
them to the British Government.
l	 Form a public opinion and organise people in the country.
l	 Allow centres in India for All India Competitive 
Examinations as well.
Every year in December, the annual conference of the Indian 
National Congress was held in different parts of the country. 
The important leaders of that time were Dadabhai Naoroji, 
Surendranath Banerjee, Pherozshah Mehta, Badruddin 
Tyabji, Gopalakrishna Gokhale, Balagangadhara Tilak, P. 
Ananda Charlu, R. C. Dutt and Ananda Mohan Bose.
Partition and Division

--- PAGE 36 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p036_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p036_01)]
36
Social Science
Standard
You have read the description of an official note written 
by Risley, the Home Secretary of the Government of India, 
explaining the objective of the partition of Bengal.
The British authorities devised various strategies to weaken 
the Congress-led struggles. The most important of these 
was  the Partition of Bengal. The aim was to divide the 
province of Bengal into two which was the stronghold of 
the nationalist movement. Lord Curzon, the British Viceroy, 
argued that the existing province of Bengal was vast and 
partition was necessary for efficient administration.
Partition of Bengal
Bengal was divided into East Bengal and West Bengal. 
East Bengal was a Muslim-majority region and West 
Bengal was a Hindu-majority region.
What was the real motive behind the partition of Bengal?
l
On October 16, 1905, when the partition was effected, 
mourning was observed throughout Bengal. A hartal was 
observed in Calcutta. People also gathered in the streets 
singing the patriotic song ‘Amar Sonar Bangla’ composed by 
Rabindranath Tagore. These protests turned into a massive 
strike. This is known as the ‘Swadeshi Movement.’ The 
Indian National Movement was energised by the Swadeshi 
Movement.
The main mode of struggle of this movement was the use of 
Indian goods and the boycott of British goods. ‘Self-reliance’ 
was the main concept of the Swadeshi Movement.  The meaning 
and purpose of the Swadeshi Movement was to promote the 
success of Swadeshi industries and other enterprises, which 
meant boycotting British products and thus depriving the 
government of trade revenue.  As part of this,
l	 Many textile mills, soap factories, match factories, 
handloom establishments, national banks and insurance 
companies were started.

--- PAGE 37 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p037_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p037_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p037_03.jpg (fig_ch02_p037_03)]
37
Towards the Emergence of the 
National Movement
l	 Bengal Chemical Store started by Acharya P. C. Roy, 
Swadeshi Store started by Rabindranath Tagore, the 
Swadeshi Steem Navigation Company started under the 
leadership of V. Chidambaram Pillai and the Steel Factory 
established by Jamshedji Tata were formed as part of the 
Swadeshi Movement.
Surendranath Banerjee's description of the Swadeshi 
Movement is given below.
 ‘In the days of strength, the Swadeshi 
movement coloured the fabric of our 
social and domestic life. Wedding presents 
comprising foreign materials which could be 
made in India were returned. Priests often 
objected to officiating at ceremonies in which 
things were offered to the gods. Guests refused 
to participate in celebrations where foreign 
salt and sugar used.’
Courtesy: Bipan Chandra, Modern India
Fig. 2.17 l 
Surendranath Banerjee
List the facts that can be gleaned about the Swadeshi Movement from 
this description.
l	 wedding gifts which included foreign objects were returned
l
Such campaigns created awareness of the ideas of  the 
Swadeshi Movement and had a great influence on the Indian 
people. Through this, the common people, women and 
students of India became participants in a political movement 
for the first time. The influence of this movement was felt in 
the fields of culture, education, economy and politics.
The Swadeshi Movement was able to spread the Indian 
freedom movement at the national level and contribute the 
Swadeshi as a new way of freedom struggle. The Swadeshi 
Movement brought the national struggle closer to the 
common people.

--- PAGE 38 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p038_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p038_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p038_03.jpg (fig_ch02_p038_03)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p038_04.jpg (fig_ch02_p038_04)]
38
Social Science
Standard
Swadeshi Samitis were 
voluntary organisations 
that worked to spread the 
message of the Swadeshi 
Movement and organise 
the people. The Swadeshi 
Bandhab Samiti formed 
by Ashwini Kumar Dutt is 
important here.
l	 Provide physical 
training to volunteers. 
l	 Help those who suffer 
from epidemics and 
other ailments.
l	 Establish Swadeshi 
Vidyalayas.
 These were their main 
objectives.
Swadhesi 
Samitis
Fig. 2.18 l Ashwini Kumar Dutt
Prepare a seminar paper on the topic ‘The 
influence of Swadeshi Movement in the 
Indian freedom struggle.’
Moderates and Extremists
There were differences of opinion among the leaders 
regarding the working methods of the Indian National 
Congress. The early leadership was not ready for an 
open struggle against the British. They were known 
as moderates. Chief among them were Pherozshah 
Mehta, Gopalakrishna Gokhale and Dadabhai Naoroji.
They propagated their ideas through peaceful 
and bloodless struggles, meetings, speeches and 
resolutions.
Another group, dissatisfied with the ideas and 
activities of the moderates, became strong in the 
Congress.  They were known as extremists. Bal 
Gangadhara Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal and Lala Lajpat 
Rai were prominent among them. Their mode of action 
was quite different from those of the moderates. 
They adopted revolutionary methods of action like 
swadeshi and boycott to argue that freedom could be 
achieved only through strong open struggle.
Compare the working methods of the 
moderates with that of the extremists 
in the Indian National Movement and 
prepare a note.
The differences between the moderates and the 
extremists became acute at the Surat Congress 
conference in 1907. It even became impossible to 
continue the conference. These developments led to 
a split in the Congress.
The British took advantage of the split in the Congress 
very skillfully. This allowed the British to implement 
their policy of divide and rule more effectively. The 
British took strict action against the extremists. The

--- PAGE 39 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p039_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p039_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p039_04.jpg (fig_ch02_p039_04)]
39
Towards the Emergence of the 
National Movement
A Muslim delegation led by Aga Khan met Lord 
Minto at Simla and put forward some demands.  
They demanded special representation for their 
community at all levels of government and separate 
constituencies for Muslims. The Viceroy’s response 
to these demands was quite favourable.  This led to 
the formation of a separate political organisation for 
the Muslims and in 1906 the All India Muslim League 
was founded.
Formation of All India Muslim League
Fig. 2.19 l Pherozeshah Mehta
Fig. 2.20 l Gopal Krishna Gokhale
Lala Lajpat Rai, Bal Gangadhara Tilak and Bipin Chandra Pal were 
extremist leaders who emphasised the need to end British rule by giving 
more strength to the Swadeshi movement. These leaders are collectively 
known as Lal-Bal-Pal.
Figures 2.21 l Lala Lajpat Rai
Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Bipin Chandra Pal
Lal-Bal-Pal
leaders were arrested and jailed. Many leaders, including 
Balagangadhara Tilak, were exiled and many leaders quit 
politics.
The British implemented some administrative reforms 
to mitigate popular anger and influence moderates in 
Congress.  The Minto Morley reforms of 1909 were of this 
type.  The main provisions of this reform were the provision 
of separate constituencies for Muslims and expansion of the 
functions and powers of the legislatures.

--- PAGE 40 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p040_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p040_01)]
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p040_03.jpg (fig_ch02_p040_03)]
40
Social Science
Standard
The Partition of Bengal and the Minto-Morley Reforms are examples 
of the British policy of ‘divide and rule’.  Record your response to this 
statement.
Home Rule League
During the First World War, which started in 1914, political 
activities were revived.  It was led by an organisation called 
the Home Rule League. The Home Rule League helmed 
under the leadership of Annie Besant and Bal Gangadhara 
Tilak gained popular support in the cities and villages. The 
aim of this organisation was Home Rule or Self-Government.
Annie Besant and Bal Ganghadhara Tilak travelled across the 
country to promote the Home Rule League and set up many 
branches. Realising that the Home Rule League’s activities 
were a threat to British supremacy, the government arrested 
and imprisoned Annie Besant.  Later, she was released 
from jail and was elected the President of the Congress in 
Calcutta Conference in 1917.  Annie Besant is the first woman 
president of the Indian National Congress.
Fig. 2.23 l Home Rule League Promotional Programme
Fig. 2.22 l 
Annie Besant

--- PAGE 41 ---
41
Towards the Emergence of the 
National Movement
Unity in Lucknow
The annual conference of the Congress in 1916 was held 
in Lucknow.  This conference was notable due to some 
important decisions. In this conference it was decided that 
the moderates and extremists should unite and the Indian 
National Congress and the All India Muslim League should 
work together.
By Alternative Means
In contrast to the  Indian National Congress’ method of 
struggle, some formed secret revolutionary organisations 
and resorted to armed struggle. They believed that the 
Western empire could only be overthrown through violence. 
Some of them are given in the list.
Revolutionary organisations
Place
Leadership
Anusheelan Samiti
Bengal
Sachindra Nath Sanyal,
Aurobindo Ghosh
Bharat Mata Association 
Madras
Neelakanta Brahmachari,
Vanchi Iyer,
Ajit Singh
Yugantar Party
 Bengal
Rash Behari Bose,
Khudiram Bose
Ghadar party
America
Lala Hardayal
The various exploitative policies of the British and the 
resistance of the Indian people against them led to the 
growth of Indian nationalism. With the formation of the 
Indian National Congress, the resistance of the Indian 
people against the British took an organised form. The 
Swadeshi Movement against the partition of Bengal was the 
most powerful popular movement of that time.  Later, with 
Gandhiji taking the lead, the freedom struggle became more 
popular and powerful.

--- PAGE 42 ---
[Diagram: images/fig_ch02_p042_01.jpg (fig_ch02_p042_01)]
42
Social Science
Standard
Extended Activities
l	 Add more dialogues to the play ‘Nil Darpan’ and perform a role play.
l	 Prepare a digital magazine/digital presentation including various social 
reformers in India and their activities.
l	 Collect and perform nationalistic poems and songs.
