--- Page 1 ---
Annual Evaluation 2022-23
Social Science
Answer key
Total Score 80 
 Class IX
Answer any 7 questions from 1 to 8 .Each carries 2 score
1 A -Right to equality B-Right to freedom
2
(Any two )
3  Agricultural production decreased due to climate change , Famine
,Plague and Black Death  Crusades , Kings monopoly of gunpowder
,Peasant Revolts , Emergence of Nation State  (Any two)
4 The soil formed by the weathering of lava rocks is fertile. Example :
the black soil of the Deccan plateau. Volcanic ash is a good manure.
Geysers are formed in many volcanic regions. Such regions are being
developed as tourist centers. Example: the Old Faithful Geyser,
YellowStone National Park - North America.    (Any two)
5 A -Eranadu B-Thrippapur Swaroopam
6 Product method ,Income method , Expenditure method (Any two)
7 Silk route ,Rea route
8  Desamaryada ,Thozhilmaryada , Swaroopamaryada , Shudramaryada ,
Jathimaryada
(Any two)

--- Page 2 ---
Answer any 6 questions from 9  to15  .Each carries 3 score
9 Depositing boulders along the seashore, Construction of
interlocking concrete structures (Pulimuttu) , Planting of mangroves.
10 Constructed roads connecting major cities ,Granted loans to
traders ,Constructed Sarais (rest houses) , Implemented uniform
taxation , Postal facilities were made efficient , Implemented
efficient coinage system .
(Any three)
11  Environmental goals , Economic goals, Social goals
12 Do not build houses on the river banks. Do not reclaim the paddy
fields. They are the natural sinks for rain water.  Construct bunds on
the river banks.
13 Slums, Traffic problems , Pollution
14 The propagators of the Bhakti cult, through their words and
songs, maintained that everyone was equal in front of God. This
strengthened the concept of social equality against caste
discrimination. The idea of gender equality also began to take shape.
The idea of social equality got wide popularity since the Movement
was led by low caste people like Thiruppana Alwar, Kabir and
Lalded. Regional languages developed. Evil practices were
questioned.
(Any three)
15 Hill sides may be transformed into terraces in order to reduce the
slope. The course of the natural streams in the hilly terrain should
not be blocked. Construction activities along steep slopes should be
avoided.
Answer any 9 questions from 16  to 25  .Each carries 4 score
16
Market reforms-Sultanate rule
Nayankara system-Vijayanagara empire

--- Page 3 ---
Ashtapradhan-Maratha empire
Mansabdari system-Mughal empire
17 Elections reflect the aspirations of the people. People can select
the rulers of their choice through elections. People can participate
and respond in democratic process. Election is a good reason for the
rulers to act according to the aspirations of people.
18 Resource scarcity ,Unemployment ,Political unrest , Natural
calamities
19  Phase by phase reduction of import duty. Reduction of subsidies.
Modification of patent laws Permitting foreign investment in service
sectors such as media, telecommunication, banking, insurance, etc.
Extension of the consideration given to domestic investments to
foreign investments.
20 Perumals had representatives called Koyiladhikarikal.  In the
matters of administration the Perumals were assisted by Naluthali,
the council of Brahmins. Perumals had a militia called Ayiram
(Thousand).  Perumals levied taxes from the Nadus, Nagaras
(towns), Brahmin Gramas, temples, etc.
21 A -River ,B -Sea cliff, C-Cirques,D-Deposition
22 Cause physical and mental problems.Increase crimes.Cause
family problems and financial crisis.Cause suicidal tendencies and
accidental death.
23 Provide immediate medical aid to the injured. Do not believe or
spread rumors.  Keep only precious items or documents along with
you.  Drink boiled water only.  Keep the necessary medicines with
you.
(Any four)
24 The number of insecure old age people is increasing in our
country. The increase of the nuclear families and families moving to

--- Page 4 ---
cities in search of better living conditions hardly provide the care
and consideration that the old age people have enjoyed. This causes
loneliness. The old age people face problems like disaffection,
disregard, loneliness, uncertainty, economic crisis, health problems
and stress. They cause internal conflicts in them. Their loneliness
has been growing as a big social problem.
(Any four)
25  Relaxation of control in setting up industries .Reduction of
import tariff and tax .Changes in foreign exchange rules .Abolition
of market control . Permission of foreign investment in many
sectors. Reduced the role of government in the basic industries and
basic infrastructure development.
(Any four)
Answer the  questions  26 and  27  .Each carries 6 score
26
(Any three)
Electoral Reforms

--- Page 5 ---
An Identity card with the voter's photo has been introduced. Limits
have been set on the election expenses of candidates. Implemented
code of conduct for political parties and candidates. Electronic
voting machines (EVM) have been introduced in elections.
Published voters' list with photo of the electors. Negative voting
system has been introduced. ï Included the photo of candidates on
ballot paper.
(Any three)
OR
Janmam Land
The rights over the land passed on from one generation to another
and became a birthright. This kind of land came to be known as
Janmam Land and the people who had the ownership right over
those lands as Janmis.
Verumpattam
A custom called Verumpattam became widely prevalent during this
period. The Verumpattam land was the land given to the Kudiyans
by the Janmis with the agreement that a predetermined share of the
produce would be given to the Janmi.
The Panayapattam system
The Panayapattam system which was also known as Kanam and Otti
became prevalent after the period of the Perumals. According to
this, the person who took the land on lease (kanakudiyan) used to
give an amount as security to the landlord when he leased the land
for cultivation. The Kanakudiyan did not have the right to sell or
transfer this land. He just had the right to cultivate in this land.
27
Linear pattern-Settlement pattern that develops parallel to features
such as roads, rivers, coastlines, etc.

--- Page 6 ---
Circular pattern-Settlement pattern that develops around features
such as water bodies, pastures, places of worship, etc.
Star pattern-Settlement pattern that develops at places where
different roads converge
OR
Socialist economy-Activities aimed at social welfare , Absence of
private entrepreneur , Absence of private ownership of wealth and
transfer of wealth to legal heir , Economic equality (Any three)
Capitalist economy - Freedom for the entrepreneurs to produce any
commodity . Right to private property . Profit motive .Transfer of
wealth to legal heir .Free market with no control over price .
Consumers sovereignty .Competition among entrepreneurs to sell
products
(Any three)
Prepared By Ambily Oommen
HST-Social Science
MDSHSS KOTTAYAM