=== SSLC Biology March 2023 Question Paper with Answers (EM) ===

Students can read Kerala SSLC Biology Question Paper March 2023 with Answers English Medium and Kerala SSLC Biology Previous Year Question Papers with Answers helps you to score more marks in your examinations. Kerala Syllabus Class 10 Biology Question Paper March 2023 with Answers English Medium Time: 1½ Hours Total Score: 40 Instructions: The first 15 minutes is cool-off time. You may use the time to read the questions and plan your answers. Answer only based on instructions and questions given. Consider score and time while answering. Answer any 5 from Qn. No. 1 to 6. Each carries 1 score. (5 × 1 = 5) Question 1. Identify the word pair relation and fill in the blank. (1) Planaria: Eye spot Housefly: _____________ Answer: Ommatidia Question 2. Choose the correct pair from the following options. (1) ENT &#8211; Treatment of Eye Cardiology &#8211; Treatment of Heart Opthalmology &#8211; Treatment of Cancer Answer: Cardiology &#8211; Treatment of Heart Question 3. Correct mistakes if any in the underlined part of the given statements. (1) (a) Gibberellin stimulates the breakdown of stored food to facilitate germination. (b) Ethylene promotes the growth of terminal buds. (c) Cytokinin maintains the dormancy of the embryo. Answer: (b) Auxin (c) Abscisic Acid Question 4. The genetic makeup of human females is 44+XX and that of males is 44+XY. What do the XX and XY indicate? (1) Answer: Sex Chromosomes Question 5. Find out the odd one and write the common feature of others. (1) Chimpanzee, Gorilla, Monkey, Oranguttan. Answer: Monkey. Others are included in hominoidea. Question 6. What does the illustration indicate? (1) Answer: Nucleotide Answer any 6 questions from Q. No. 7 to 13. Each carries 2 scores. (6 × 2 = 12) Question 7. Write the name and functions of A and B in the given figure. (2) Answer: (a) Axon, which carries impulses from the cell body to the outside. (b) Synaptic knob, which secretes neurotransmitters. Question 8. Analyze the given illustration and answer the questions. (a) Which process does this illustration indicate? (1) (b) How does this process cause variation? (1) Answer: (a) Crossing over (b) Part of a DNA crosses over to become the part of another DNA. They cause differences in the distribution of genes. When these chromosomes are transferred to the next generation they cause variation in offspring. Question 9. Symptoms of a viral disease are given. Analyze them and answer the questions. Inflammation of the liver. White portions of the eyes and nails become yellow-colored. (a) Identify the disease. (1) (b) Why do the white portions of the eyes and nails become yellow-colored? (1) Answer: (a) Hepatitis (b) Because of the presence of bilirubin in blood. Question 10. The details of the blood groups of two persons are given in the table. Analyze them and answer the questions. Person Antigen Antibody Rh Factor X B a Present Y A b Absent (a) Identify the blood groups of persons X and Y. (1) (b) Can Y receive blood from X? Why? (1) Answer: (a) X &#8211; B+ve Y &#8211; A-ve (b) No. The antigen in the donor’s blood reacts with the antibody in the recipient’s blood will react to each other to form a blood clot (Coagulation). Question 11. Choose suitable hints from the box and complete the table. (2) Answer: Disease Vector Pathogen Malaria Anopheles Mosquito Plasmodium Filariasis Culex Mosquito Filarial Worm Question 12. Analyze the given statements and answer the questions. (i) Sudden withdrawal of the hand while touching on a hot object unknowingly. (ii) Blinking of eyes when light suddenly falls on them. (a) Name the reflex actions that take place in (i) and (ii). (1) (b) What is reflex action? (1) Answer: (a) (i) Spinal reflex (ii) Cerebral reflex. (b) Reflex actions are the accidental and involuntary responses of the body, in response to stimuli. Question 13. The main concept of the Origin of life is given below. Analyze it and answer the questions. Life originated in some other planet in the universe and accidentally reached the Earth. (a) Which theory is mentioned here? (1) (b) Which evidence supports this? (1) Answer: (a) Panspermia theory. (b) The organic substances obtained from the meteors that fell on earth. Answer any 5 from Qn. No. 14 to 20. Each carries 3 scores. (5 × 3 = 15) Question 14. Arrange columns B and C according to column A. A. Parts B. Peculiarity C. Function Cerebrum Rod shaped part. Maintenance of homeostasis. Cerebellum Situated just below the thalamus. Controls involuntary actions like heartbeat, breathing, etc. Medulla Oblongata The second largest part of the brain. Evokes sensations. The largest part of the brain. Maintains equilibrium of the body. Answer: A. Parts B. Peculiarity C. Function Cerebrum The largest part of the brain Evokes sensations Cerebellum The second largest part of the brain Maintains equilibrium of the body Medulla Oblongata Rod-shaped part Controls involuntary actions like heartbeat, breathing, etc. Question 15. Hints related to a disease are given. Analyze them and answer the questions. It is a genetic disease. Excess blood is lost even through minor wounds. (a) Identify the disease. (1) (b) Why excess blood is lost even through minor wounds in such patients? (1) (c) How temporary relief is brought in, for such patients? (1) Answer: (a) Haemophilia. (b) Protein that enables blood coagulation is absent and no clotting occurs. (c) Temporary relief is obtained by identifying the deficient protein and injecting it. Question 16. A table showing the blood glucose levels of three persons before breakfast is given below. Analyze it and answer the questions. Individual Blood Glucose Level A 82 mg/100 ml B 178 mg/100 ml C 104 mg/100 ml (a) Which person is Diabetic? (b) What is the cause of this disease? (c) What are the symptoms of this disease? Answer: (a) Person B. (b) Decreased production of insulin due to the destruction of beta cells. The inability of cells to utilize the insulin produced. (c) Increased appetite and thirst, frequent urination. Question 17. Stages in the process of protein synthesis are given below. Arrange them in sequential order. Protein is synthesized. mRNA reaches the ribosome. mRNA reaches outside the nucleus. Amino acids are added based on the information in mRNA. tRNA brings different kinds of amino acids to ribosomes. mRNA forms from DNA. Answer: mRNA forms from DNA. mRNA reaches outside the nucleus. mRNA reaches ribosomes. tRNA brings different kinds of amino acids to ribosomes. Amino acids are added based on the information in mRNA. Protein is synthesized. Question 18. The flow chart and hints related to a theory of evolution are given below. Analyze them and answer the questions. (a) Choose suitable hints from the box and fill in A and B. (1) (b) Which theory is indicated in the flow chart? (1) (c) What is the limitation of this theory? (1) Answer: (a) A &#8211; Struggle for existence. B &#8211; Natural selection. (b) Theory of Natural selection/Darwinism. (c) Darwin could not explain the reason for variation. Question 19. Give a reason for the following. (a) There is no vision in the Blindspot. (b) Persons with color blindness are not selected for jobs like that of drivers, pilots, etc. (c) The deficiency of Vitamin A results in Night blindness. Answer: (a) Photoreceptors are absent in blind spots. (b) They cannot distinguish green and red colors. (c) Retinal, the visual pigment, is formed from vitamin A. Question 20. Observe the illustration showing the production of insulin through Genetic engineering and answer the questions. (a) Name enzymes X, Y. (1) (b) What is the role of plasmid In this process? (1) (c) Does the succeeding generations of bacteria produced in this way have the ability to produce insulin? Why? (1) Answer: (a) X &#8211; Restriction endonuclease (genetic scissor), Y &#8211; Ligase (genetic glue). (b) Plasmid is used as a vector for carrying the insulin gene. (c) Yes, because they carry the gene responsible for insulin production. Answer any 2 from Qn. no. 21 to 23. Each carries 4 scores. (2 × 4 = 8) Question 21. Observe the illustration and answer the questions. (a) What is the process indicated in this illustration? (1) (b) Name the white blood cells involved in this process. (1) (c) Write the steps involved in this process in sequential order. (2) Answer: (a) Phagocytosis (b) Monocytes, Neutrophils. (c) The phagocyte engulfs the pathogens in a membrane sac. The membrane sac combines with a lysosome. The enzyme in the lysosome degenerates and destroys the pathogens. Question 22. Redraw the diagram. Name and label the parts indicated below. (For drawing 1 score) (2) (a) The transparent anterior part of the sclera. (1) (b) The point of maximum visual clarity. (1) (c) Transmits impulses to the visual center of the brain. (1) Answer: Question 23. Analyze the illustration of hormonal disorders and answer the questions. (a) Name the hormone indicated as X. (1) (b) Identify the disorders A and B. (1) (c) What are the symptoms of A and B? (2) Answer: (a) Somatotropin (Growth Hormone) (b) A &#8211; Gigantism. B &#8211; Acromegaly. (c) A &#8211; Excessive growth of the body. B &#8211; Growth of the bones on the face, jaws, and fingers.