=== SSLC Biology March 2024 Question Paper with Answers (EM) ===

Students can read Kerala SSLC Biology Question Paper March 2024 with Answers English Medium and Kerala SSLC Biology Previous Year Question Papers with Answers helps you to score more marks in your examinations. Kerala Syllabus Class 10 Biology Question Paper March 2024 with Answers English Medium Time: 1½ Hours Total Score: 40 Instructions: The first 15 minutes is cool-off time. You may use the time to read the questions and plan your answers. Answer only based on instructions and questions given. Consider score and time while answering. Answer any 5 from questions 1-6. One score each. (5 × 1 = 1) Question 1. Identify the pigment present in the given photoreceptor cell. (1) Answer: Rhodopsin or Iodopsin Question 2. Which among the following is not a component of a nucleotide? (1) (a) Phosphate (b) Sugar (c) Protein (d) Nitrogen base Answer: (c) Protein Question 3. Find out the correct one from the given pairs. (1) Monocyte: Stimulates other white blood cells. Lymphocyte: Engulls and destroys germs. Neutrophil: Identifies and destroys germs specifically. Eosinophil: Synthesises chemicals required for the inflammatory responses. Answer: Eosinophil: Synthesizes chemicals required for inflammatory responses Question 4. Identify the word pair relation and fill in the blanks. (1) Fruit formation: Auxin Ripening of fruits: ___________ Answer: Ethylene Question 5. The technology used to identify the location of a gene in the DNA responsible for a particular trait is: (1) (a) Gene therapy (b) Gene mapping (c) DNA profiling (d) DNA fingerprinting Answer: (b) Gene mapping Question 6. Correct the mistakes in the underlined part of the given statements. (1) (a) The Panspermia argues that life originated on another planet and accidentally reached the Earth. (b) Huso de Vries is the scientist who put forward the scientific theory on evolution called the Natural Selection theory. (c) Organs that are similar in structure and perform different functions are called homologous organs. Answer: (b) Charles Darwin Answer any 6 from the questions 7-13. 2 scores each. (6 × 2 = 12) Question 7. Analyze the symptoms of a disease given and answer the questions. (a) Identify the disease. (1) (b) Write the cause of the disease. (1) Answer: (a) Alzheimer’s. (b) Accumulation of an insoluble protein in the neural tissues of the brain. Neurons get destroyed. Question 8. Analyze the given table related to the activities of hormones and complete it properly. (2) A (Causes) B (Gland) C (Disease) (i) (ii) Cretinism Reabsorption of water in the kidney decreases (iii) (iv) Answer: (i) Hypothyroidism refers to a decrease in the amount of thyroxine during the foetal stage or infancy. (ii) Thyroid (iii) Hypothalamus (iv) Diabetes insipidus Question 9. Analyze the illustration and answer the questions. (a) Identify the process. (1) (b) What is the importance of this process? (1) Answer: (a) Crossing over of Chromosomes. (b) Responsible for creating genetic variation within individuals of a species. Question 10. Write appropriate reasons for the given statements. (a) An ash-colored thick coating is formed in the throat of Diphtheria diphtheria-affected person. (1) (b) Complete cure is not possible for Haemophilia. (1) Answer: (a) The toxins produced by the bacteria (Corynebacterium diphtheriae) destroy the mucus membrane of the throat. (b) It is a genetic disease. Question 11. Choose the activities of the Sympathetic system from the box. (2) Production of saliva decreases, Urinary bladder contracts, Gastric activities become Normal, Production of saliva increases, Glycogen is converted to glucose Answer: Production of saliva decreases. Glycogen is converted to glucose. Question 12. Analyze the given illustration and answer the questions. (a) Which theory of evolution is proved by this experiment? (1) (b) What are the main postulates put forward by this theory? (1) Answer: (a) Theory of Chemical Evolution/Oparinhaldane hypothesis. (b) Life originated by the change that occurred in the chemical substances in water, under specific conditions of the primitive earth. Question 13. How does smoking harmfully affect the following organ systems? (2) Respiratory system Circulatory system Answer: (a) Lung cancer, Bronchitis, Emphysema. (Any two) (b) Hypertension, arteries lose elasticity, and decrease in functional efficiency. Answer any 5 from questions 14 &#8211; 20. 3 scores each. (5 × 3 = 15) Question 14. Observe the illustration of impulse transmission through synapse and answer the following questions. (a) Which part is denoted as ‘X’ ? (b) Which chemical is secreted from ‘X’? (c) Why does impulse travel only from X to Y? Answer: (a) X: synaptic knob (b) Neurotransmitter (Acetylcholine/dopamine/GABA) (c) Synaptic knob (X) secret neurotransmitters which is receives an impulse from adjacent neurons by Dendrite (Y). Question 15. Analyze the given stages in the process of detecting smell and write in sequential order. (3) Experiences smell. Aromatic particles enter the nostrils. Generate impulses. Stimulate the Olfactory receptors. These aromatic particles dissolve in the mucus. Impulses reach the brain. Answer: Aromatic particles enter the nostrils. Aromatic particles dissolve in the mucus. Stimulates the olfactory receptors. Generate impulses. Question 16. Analyse the given table and arrange columns B and C according to column A. A. Disease B. Symptoms C. Transmission Tuberculosis Dark yellow colour to the mucus membrane, white portion of the eyes, and the nails. Spread by culex mosquitos. Hepatitis High fever with shivering and profuse sweating, headache, vomiting, diarrhea, and anemia. When the patient speaks, coughs, or sneezes, the pathogens spread into the air. Malaria Loss of body weight, fatigue, and persistent cough. Contaminated food and water, blood components, and excreta of the patient. The appearance of red dish scaly rashes that cause itching. Spread by female anopheles mosquito. Answer: A. Disease B. Symptoms C. Transmission Tuberculosis Loss of body weight, Fatigue, and persistent cough. When the patient speaks, coughs or sneezes, the pathogens spread into the air. Hepatitis Dark yellow colour to the mucus membrane, white portion of the eyes, and the nails. Contaminated food and water, blood components and excreta of the patient. Malaria High fever with shivering and profuse sweating, headache, vomiting, Diarrhea, and anemia. Spread through female anopheles mosquitoes. Question 17. Analyze the given statement and answer the questions. (3) “The basis of blood grouping is the presence of antigen A and antigen B in red blood cells.” According to this, how many blood groups are there in humans? Write the antigen and antibody of each group. Answer: Blood Group Antigen Antibodies A A B B B A AB A and B Nil O Nil A and B Question 18. Some of the features of nucleic acids and their constituents are given below. Arrange them on the table suitably. Ribose sugar, Uracil, Deoxyribose sugar, Double helical model, Single strand, Thymine Answer: DNA RNA Deoxyribose sugar Ribose sugar Double helical model Single stand Thymine Uracil Question 19. Observe the illustration of bacteria and answer the questions. (a) Which part is denoted as ‘X’? (1) (b) What is the significance of ‘X’ in the process of genetic engineering? (2) Answer: (a) X: Plasmid/Circular DNA of bacteria (b) Plasmid acts as vectors to transfer genes from one cell to another. Vectors that contain recombined genes enter target cells and the new genes become a part of the genetic constitution of target cells. Question 20. Write any three pieces of evidence from biochemistry and physiology to prove bacteria and humans evolved from a common ancestor. (3) Answer: Enzymes control chemical reactions. Energy is stored in ATP molecules. Genes determine the hereditary traits. Carbohydrates, proteins, and fats are the basic substances. Answer any 2 questions from 21 &#8211; 23. Each carries 4 scores. (2 × 4 = 8) Question 21. The function of regulating the level of calcium in the blood is illustrated. Analyze it and answer the following questions. (a) Which gland produces the hormone indicated as ‘X’? (1) (b) Which hormone is indicated by ‘Y’? (1) (c) Write down the other functions of these hormones. (2) Answer: (a) Thyroid Gland (b) Parathormone (c) Calcitonin &#8211; Lowering the calcium levels in your blood. Parathormone &#8211; increasing the calcium level when they are too low. Question 22. Explain how the following strategies of defense help in immune function. (a) Phagocytosis (b) Fever (c) Healing of Wounds (d) Blood Clotting Answer: (a) Engulfing and destroying germs. (b) An increase in body temperature reduces the multiplication of pathogens and increases the effect of phagocytosis. (c) Reduces the chance of infection by the healing wounds reduction. (d) Helps to prevent bleeding and checks the entry of pathogens through wounds. Question 23. Redraw the diagram, and identify and label the parts with their names. Redraw the diagram. (a) The part that carries impulses out of the cell body. (1) (b) The part that receives messages from the adjacent neuron. (1) (c) The part that carries impulses to the cell body. (1) Answer: